Norse word	English word	Example sentence	Notes
ay (as in always)	always	I will always be with you.	Ay related to nay. The native cognate was OE ā, which would now be o (as OE nā became no).
bale (as in balefire)	beel	The night was lit up by the beelfire.	From OE cognate.
beck (as in brook)	brook	Some children were playing alongside the brook.	
bink	bench	Sit down on the bench at once.	
brig (as in bridge)	bridge	A great bridge spans over the sea.	
busk	dight	I dighted myself for tomorrow's journey.	Now a literary word.
carl	churl	The noble disliked being equated to a churl.	Carl is now dialectal, but it is still used in the historical word housecarl.
dwale	deadly nightshade	This potion is made from deadly nightshade.	
ettle (verb)	mean	I mean to meet him tomorrow.	
ettle (noun)	meaning	It is my meaning to travel to Norway.	
fro	from	The insect flitted to and from.	Survives in the phrase to and fro. The native variant to and from is attested in ME.
froward	wayward	He is such a wayward child.	
gain (prefix)	yen	Critics yensaid the mayor's plan.	Gain- found in gainsay.
gate (as in way)	way	Step out of my way at once.	Gate related to gait.
gill (as in ravine)	crundle	I glided through the crundle for a while.	From ME crundel.
One can also use dialectal clough (rhyming with tough), though it is not attested in OE.
gill (as in brook)	brook	He has lain by the brook for hours.	
gimmer (as in yearling ewe)	yearling ewe	I sold my friend a few yearling ewes.	
gowk (as in cuckoo)	yeak	I soon heard a yeak's cry.	
gowk (as in fool)	halfwit	I made him look like a halfwit before everyone.	
hail (as in hello)	bewhole	Bewhole, my good friend!	Based on OE wes/bēo hāl. Written as one word like the interjection begone.
One can also use whole (attested once as an interjection in ME).
All hail can be replaced with all whole, based on ME alhol (also attested once as an interjection).
hap	whate	May the goddess of whate smile upon you.	
harnpan	headbone	What is inside your headbone, anyway?	
harns	brains	The old man knocked their brains out.	
holm (as in islet)	eyot	A great stone lies to the west of the eyot.	Ait used as variant. OE cognate of holm meant sea.
holm (as in bottomland)	bottomland	Many species live in bottomland habitats.	
husbandman	acreman	I saw many acremen working in the fields.	
ken (verb)	know	Do you know that man?	The verb ken is etymologically a causative of can (which originally meant know); thus, ken meant cause to know. In other West Germanic languages, the verb lost its causative force and gained the meaning of know. However, in Old English, its causative force was kept, and its non-causative use only begins to be attested in Middle English. It is possible that the loss of the causative meaning is a native development, but since non-causative ken was more commonly found in northern and East Midlands dialects, and Norse kenna had already gained the non-causative meaning of know, it is likely that ken gaining the meaning of know was due to Norse influence.
kirk	church	The man made his way to the church.	
kist	chest	I stowed my clothes in the chest.	
laik	play	The children like to play outside all day.	
lair (as in mud)	horrow	The two boys rolled around in horrow.	From ME horwe, variant of ME hore (one can use hore instead).
lait	look for	I have looked for her for days.	
lig	lie	Relax and lie down on the bench.	
mickle	much	That elephant is such a much beast.	From obsolete meaning of large. The opposite of little.
Mickle may be from Norse mikill or inflected OE forms such as micles and miclum.
mun	must	With the way he is dressed, he must be an important man.	
nieve	fist	I struck the man with my fist.	
rig (as in ridge)	ridge	The farmland here has many ridges.	Unrelated to rig meaning arrange.
scathe	shathe	He fled the building unshathed.	From OE cognate. Norse word still found in scathing and unscathed.
scaw	headland	Many castles are built on headlands.	
scot (as in payment)	shot	It's your turn to pay your shot.	From native cognate.
skell (as in shell)	shell	The man was holding a tortoise shell.	
spae	foretell	The prophet foretold that he should die tomorrow.	
staithe	wharf	A ship full of coal arrived at the wharf.	OE cognate meant bank, shore.
thig	beseech	The pauper besought me for food.	
thorp	throp	The throp held a festival yesterday.	From ME throp.
The OE variant þorp (etymologically the original form) is attested sporadically in pre-Conquest placenames and is found independently only once (but because the text was written post-Conquest, it is possible that this þorp came from Norse). The normal OE form seemed to be þrop (showing metathesis). Admittedly, the word in OE is scantily attested, as there are apparently only four attestations of þrop in glosses. ME attestations show thorp and throp used independently, and it seems that throp was the form used in the more southern dialects, whereas thorp was used in the more northern dialects, which suggests that the thorp form was mainly due to Norse influence.
trig	tidy	Everyone here looks tidy.	
wale (as in choice)	kir	One must think carefully about one's kirs.	From ME kire.
wale (as in choose)	choose	I may have chosen poorly.	
wark (as in pain)	warch	I feel warch throughout my body.	From ME warche.
whin (as in gorse)	gorse	The creature leapt into the gorse shrubs.	Or: furze.
