French word	English word	Example sentence	Notes
affray (as in frighten)	afear	The sound of thunder afears me very much.	Now a dialectal word. The past participle afeared is used in the same way as afraid (etymologically the past participle of affray).
caitiff (as in wretch)	wretch	That man is nothing but a worthless wretch.	The adjectival form is now wretched.
disport (as in amusement)	play	The king often went hunting in the words for play.	From an old use of play.
disport (as in pastime)	play	Many plays were held in the festival.	One can also use playgame for clarity.
disport (as in frolic)	play	Young men like to go to the countryside to play.	
evangel (as in gospel)	gospel	Reading the gospel was very enlightening.	For the meaning of evangelist (which appears to be from Greek, according to the OED), gospeler can be used.
gest (as in heroic deed)	ellendeed	The knight spoke of his ellendeeds.	From OE ellendǣd. Extended here to also mean tale of a heroic deed.
mappemonde (as in world map)	worldchart	The cartographer drew up a worldchart.	Note that for map (which is either from Latin mappa or a shortening of this word), the French word chart is used and is deemed an acceptable borrowing here (see chart above).
oliphant (as in elephant)	elp	He saw many elps in India.	From ME elp, a shortened form of OE elpend.
Obsolete form of elephant (a Latin loanword).
Other Germanic languages except Icelandic have borrowed the Latin word for this. Interestingly, the word for elephant in Icelandic is an Old Norse borrowing from Arabic.
oliphant (as in ivory horn)	elpsbonehorn	The guard sounded the elpsbonehorn.	Newly formed compound (see ivory).
orphanity (as in orphanhood)	stepbarnhood	Her stepbarnhood made many people pity her.	See orphan.
parage (as in lineage)	strind	The nobleman was of high strind.	See lineage.
parage (as in equality in rank)	evendom	There was no evendom between the two brothers.	From even + -dom. Extended here to refer to the feudal institution.
Note that the general word for equality is evenness.
paynim (as in pagan)	heathen	The heathens believed in more than one god.	Obsolete form of pagan (a Latin loanword).
Obsolete variant of paynim: payen.
In its old meaning of pagandom, one can use heathendom.
physic (as in physician's practice)	leechcraft	The student has spent three years studying leechcraft.	Now an archaic word.
physic (as in remedy, medicine)	leechcraft	He was told to take his leechcraft every two days.	Now an archaic word.
physic (as in treat with a medicine)	leech	Your sickness will be leeched with this medicine.	Now an archaic word.
pie (as in magpie)	awe	I heard a bunch of awes chattering.	From OE agu.
Pied (meaning having two or more colors) is now bleefow (from OE blēofāh, see color). Note that fow rhymes with grow.
Piebald is now aweish (adjective) and aweish deer (noun, see animal).
poesy (as in poem)	leeth	He wrote a leeth about war.	See poem.
poesy (as in poetry)	leethcraft	Old English leethcraft is known for its alliterative verse.	See poetry.
posy (as in poetic composition engraved in a ring)	leethquid	She read the leethquid in her ring.	From OE lēoþcwide (meaning poem).
posy (as in nosegay)	small blossomknitch	He gathered some blossoms to make a small blossomknitch.	Newly formed compound using knitch (a dialectal word meaning bundle).
Or: blossomknitchock, using -ock (diminutive suffix found in hillock). Calque of German Blumensträußchen.
Or: blossomknitchling (as diminutive -ling is from Norse).
presidence (as in act of presiding)	foresitting	What are the signs of God's foresitting over human affairs?	
presidence (as in office of president)	foresittership	Several controversial laws were passed under his foresittership.	This is also used for presidency (a later Latin borrowing).
promission (as in promise)	behote	He failed to uphold his behote.	See promise.
promit (as in promise)	behote	I behote to stay with you.	See promise.
tray (as in betray)	forread	Why did he forread his master?	From ME forreden. Extended here to also mean reveal unintentionally.
Also used for betray (which is etymologically be- + tray).
treacher (as in deceiver)	swike	He utterly loathes swikes.	From ME swike
