Foreign concepts

These words generally refer to a thing or concept that English speakers probably had no word for because it was foreign or unfamiliar to Englishmen. Though some of these things were introduced to England by the Normans, they are still left here anyway:

Alchemy - alchemy was introduced to England after the Conquest, and the other Germanic languages have borrowed the word as well.
Alchemist - this does not need to be altered since the other Germanic languages have adopted the word as well, and one can justify keeping -ist since the other Germanic languages have borrowed the suffix as well.
However, the adjectival form (e.g., alchemical, alchemistic) should be changed since the ending is generally replaced in the other Germanic languages with their cognate of -ish. Thus, the adjective is now alchemistish (compare with German alchemistisch).
Chess and checkmate - it appears that chess was introduced to England by the Normans, given the lack of mention of chess in Old English works, so it was natural that the name of the game and the key phrase should be borrowed from French.
Check - the word was originally used in chess to refer to a situation in which one has put the other player's king in immediate danger. From there came many senses related to stopping. This seems to have been a native development, since the word in French also has an additional sense development from its use in chess, but the additional meaning is failure and refers to the result of being stopped, not the act of stopping itself.
Note that the noun check in the sense of written order to a bank should always be spelled as check, since cheque shows influence from the related noun exchequer (which is translated here).
Coney - as rabbits are not native to Britain, it is not surprising that words referring to rabbits were borrowed after the Normans introduced them. But the historical pronunciation has /ʌ/, and one historical spelling of the word is cunny; the current pronunciation of coney is a spelling pronunciation, and the spelling with o is from French influence. As the Anglish spelling of coney would be cunny, and the aforesaid spelling pronunciation could no longer be made, the word should rhyme with honey. Of course, if this pronunciation is to be avoided because of its homophony with the vulgar word, then one can use cunning, an obsolete variant.
Note that rabbit is not kept here since other Germanic languages do not use a word coming from this root. It should also be noted that rabbit is not certain to have come from French.
Coral - the word originally referred to the red variety found in the Mediterranean, and all the other Germanic languages have borrowed the word.
Fay - the word was the original word for fairy, and most other Germanic languages have borrowed French fée as well. Fairies are a part of folklore and romance introduced from the continent, and given the variety in folklore, even with the similar concept of elves, Englishmen probably would have borrowed the word.
Note that the word fairy originally meant enchantment, fairyland (as etymologically the word is fay + -ery), but the word later changed in English to refer to the supernatural creature, probably from reinterpretation of the word in phrases like faerie knight. The current French word féerie means fairyland, fairy play, not referring to the creature itself, and it is the theatrical meaning that is used for the Germanic languages that borrow féerie. As a result, it cannot be assumed that English would have borrowed fairy anyway with its original meaning of enchantment, fairyland.
Norman and Normandy - these are foreign names, so they should not be translated.
Norman (language and adjective) - this should be changed, however, since for nationalities and languages, native English uses -ish instead. A replacement for this would be Normanish (or Normandish, based on OE Norþmandisc, though most other Germanic languages appear to derive it from their word for Norman rather than Normandy).
Nymph - this refers to a being from classical mythology, so it is no surprise that the word should have been borrowed. Though Old English used elfen (female elf) in a few compound words in an attempt to translate nymph, as most other Germanic languages have borrowed the word, it is assumed that English would have borrowed nymph as well.
Tyrant - the word originally referred to a ruler in ancient Greece that came to power unconstitutionally, so it is no surprise that other Germanic langauges have borrowed the word. Old English had lēodhata (literally people-hater) to translate the word in its meaning of cruel ruler, though the word was also used more generally, since it was used to refer to Holofernes (a general) as well as God (in reference to the act of killing all the first-born in Egypt). In any case, the modern English form comes from Old French; the expected form that English would have without French influence would be tyran, which accords nicely with derivatives such as tyranny.
Tyrannic(al), tyrannous - the word should now be tyranish.
A number of gemstones and minerals seem to have been unknown to England before the Norman Conquest.
Ruby
Sapphire
Emerald - all other Germanic languages appear to have borrowed the word from Latin smaragdus rather than its French descendant. If the English form accords with the form in other Germanic languages, then it should be smaragd (now a rare synonym for emerald).
Diamond
Serpentine
Turquoise - the current pronunciation has the foreign /ɔɪ/ and reflects the current French spelling rather than the older form borrowed in Middle English. Hence, the older form turkis (/ˈtɜːrkɪz/) should be used.
Color terms are quite tricky to work with because Old English speakers' perception of color was not the same as modern speakers', so it is uncertain how English speakers would view color without French influence.
Blue - the concept of blue as a distinct color did not seem to be present in Old English. Though Old English had a few words for varieties of blue, it seems that there was no basic color term for blue; the closest thing to a basic color term was hǣwen, but the fact that practically none of the native words for blue survived in Middle English (with scanty traces of hǣwen in the north) strongly suggests that the concept of blue had not existed for ordinary speakers. Other Germanic languages, however, have native words for blue; the Old English cognate to German blau would have been *blāw, the modern form of which would be *blow. As we wish to express the same basic colors as English, it is assumed here that Englishmen would have probably borrowed blue from French anyway.
On a related note, it seems that the OE forebear of brown had not become a basic color term; while it meant brown, it could also be used for other colors, as suggested by Latin glosses. The fact that it became a basic color term later on was probably assisted by French brun, which was almost identical in meaning and form and happens to be ultimately a borrowing from Germanic. Nonetheless, since the other Germanic languages now have their cognate of brown as a basic color term, and we wish to express the concept of brown, it is assumed here that English brown would have become a basic color term anyway.
Modern concepts

There are also words referring to modern concepts that simply did not exist in the Norman Conquest. Of course, there are modern concepts that can still be translated in Anglish, but the key criterion is that these words have also been borrowed from French or Latin by other Germanic languages (especially Icelandic).

Million and beyond - the concepts of million, billion, and other greater numbers as distinct units did not seem to exist in England. It is not hard to see why, as early speakers generally did not speak of numbers this high in daily life, and even now, numbers of that scale are more often found in more formal or specialized contexts. It is thus assumed that numbers like million and trillion would have still been borrowed later on.
Note that as part of the Germanic Stress Rule, Old English generally placed the stress on the first syllable of a word, so words like quadrillion should be pronounced with the first syllable stressed.
Second (time) and minute - the modern system of timekeeping was developed long after the Norman Conquest, so English probably would have borrowed second and minute like the other Germanic languages. Hour, on the other hand, can be translated since the word in timekeeping is simply an extended use of its general meaning of period of time.
General concepts

There are some words that expressed concepts that Old English speakers were probably aware of, but for whatever reason, they never bothered to have a word for them. Possibly, there was such a word, but is simply unattested because of historical accident.

Chart - there appears to be no attested Old English word for the meaning of map. To express this meaning, the other Germanic languages (including Icelandic) have (directly or indirectly) borrowed the word carte from French and may use it in a compound with land, e.g., German (Land)karte, Icelandic (landa)kort. Hence, chart (which shows an older form of French carte) would have likely been borrowed. Moreover, for clarity, one can use the newly formed compound landchart for the meaning of map.
Card (as in playing card) - the French word carte means both card and map, and thus, in other Germanic languages, the French borrowing has both meanings. The English word card was originally a variant of chart (also showing an unexplained voicing of the final consonant in the English form). The differentiation of meanings for chart and card is a development found in English and a few other Germanic languages such as Swedish, which uses both karta (map) and kort (card). Since Old English has no attested word for card, this word can be kept as well.
Cipher - there appears to be no Old English word for the concept of mathematical digits, and all other Germanic languages except Icelandic have borrowed the word from French and use it to refer to numerical figures. However, it seems that the English spelling was later made to look like a classical word, as the spelling uses ph (as if it had come from Greek, even though the Latin word actually comes from an Arabic word). To undo foreign influence in the spelling, we should use a spelling such as sifer. Note that cipher can still have the meaning of secret language, as French chiffre has the meaning of both digit and code.
Decipher - this appears to have been a formation inspired by French déchiffrer. As this uses the foreign prefix de-, a native formation would be uncipher.
Dance - though Old English had a few words for dance such as tumbian (related to tumble) and sealtian (a Latin loanword), it seemed that none of them was ever the general word for the concept, as words such as hoppian (hop) and tumbian had broader meanings related to movement. Even the word sealtian may have not been in general use, given its scanty attestations in Old English and its complete disappearance in Middle English. As most other European languages, including other Germanic languages (even Icelandic), have borrowed the word from French, which has wielded great influence in the arts, it is highly likely that English would have borrowed dance as well.
March (as in military march) - it seems that Old English had no word for the exact concept of walking in a regular and ordered manner (especially for military formations), and other European languages, including the Germanic ones, have borrowed the word from French, so English probably would have borrowed march as well.
Metal - though Old English had words for specific metals such as gold and silver, it seemed to have no general word for metal. Most other Germanic languages have borrowed the word from French, so it is likely that English would have borrowed metal as well.
Metallic - the word should now be metalish (with stress on the first syllable).
Music - In Old English, there were two words that had meanings related to music: drēam and glēo. The former word meant joy as well as sound that produces joy, which is why it often meant harmony. In Middle English, the word acquired the meanings of sound, noise, voice. Incidentally, it is uncertain whether this is the same word as the modern dream, as the latter word may have due to Norse influence or may have been unattested in OE. As for OE glēo, the word had the general meaning of entertainment, sport and also came to mean musical entertainment, minstrelsy. The word later became glee, which has the meaning of joy and also refers to a specific kind of singing. It appears that neither of these words truly acted as a general word for music in Old English, and since all other Germanic languages except Icelandic have borrowed the word from French or Latin, it is assumed here that English would have borrowed music from French. Note that the following should be used for the derivatives of music:
Musical (adjective) - musicly.
Musical (noun) - musicplay (newly formed compound using play meaning theatrical performance).
Musician - musicker.
Note that music here keeps its pronunciation, as it is assumed that the French form (which has /y/) would have been borrowed. The same has happened in Dutch, as muziek is from the French form. The Anglish spelling of music would be meƿsick.
Pilgrim - Old English did not seem to have a word for someone traveling to a holy site. All the other Germanic languages have borrowed the word from the Latin word, e.g., Dutch pelgrim, Danish pilgrim. Thus, English would have likely borrowed pilgrim as well.
Pilgrimage - this has the French suffix -age, so the word can be replaced with something like pilgrimfare.
Rhyme - Old English poetry generally did not use rhyme, as it used alliterative verse instead. Rhyming verse gradually became the main form of English verse after the Conquest. Notably, the word for rhyme in all the other Germanic languages, including Icelandic, ultimately comes from French. Note that the current spelling rhyme clearly shows association with Latin rhythmus, so an uninfluenced spelling would be rime.
Sauce - there is no attested Old English word for this, and it seems that the word for sauce in all other Germanic languages, including Icelandic, ultimately comes from French.
Spirit (in the sense of alcohol, volatile liquid) - this meaning appears to have come from its use in alchemy referring to a volatile substance, and most of the other Germanic languages appear to use the word for this as well.
Miscellaneous

Proud - this word was borrowed in late Old English (but before the Conquest). Old English certainly had native words to mean proud, e.g., ofermōdig (literally overmoody). It seems that OE prūd had begun to be commonly used, as it is attested with a number of derivatives such as prūtscipe and oferprūd. Hence, even though this word is certainly from French, it seems to have already found its place in common vocabulary by the time of the Conquest. As a result, pride (an analogical derivative formed by umlaut) is kept as well.
The twelve months - all the current names (ultimately from Latin) are used in other Germanic languages, including Icelandic, so it is assumed that English would have adopted these names later (for more about the native names, see here). That said, the pronunciation of some of these names shows French influence because French has influenced how we read certain letters (see here for more), and some of these forms are French rather than Latin. It is assumed here that all these names are taken from the genitive singular (which is used to derive the stem of Latin nouns), but it should be noted that the Germanic languages have been quite inconsistent on whether the final vowel should be retained, as shown in Dutch januari and German Januar. If the word has a new spelling, then it is provided alongside the Anglish spelling (note that since these are originally foreign names, certain letters such as J are kept).
January - pronounced as /ˈjænəɛri/. Spelling: Yanuary (Anglish spelling: Januarie).
February - pronounced as /ˈfɛbrəɛri/, and the Anglish spelling is Februarie.
March - pronounced as /ˈmɑːrti/. Spelling: Marty (Anglish spelling: Martie).
April - no change needed.
May - no change needed, but the Anglish spelling is Maj (since English spelling usually avoids having spellings end with i).
June - pronounced as /ˈjaʊni/. Spelling: Yowny (Anglish spelling: Junie).
July - pronounced as /ˈjaʊli/. Spelling: Yowly (Anglish spelling: Julie).
August - no change needed.
September - pronounced as /ˈsɛptɪmbər/.
October - pronounced as /ˈɒktəbər/.
November - pronounced as /ˈnɒvɪmbər/.
December - pronounced as /ˈdɛt͡ʃɪmbər/. Spelling: Dechember (Anglish spelling: December).
