Latin word	English word	Example sentence	Notes
alphabet	staffrow	He knew every part of the English staffrow.	Based on OE stæfrǣw.
All other Germanic languages except Icelandic have borrowed the word from Latin.
alphabetic(al)	staffrowish	Arrange these words in staffrowish order.	Or: alphabetish (if one is willing to borrow alphabet).
cleric	holyclerk	He decided to become a holyclerk.	Newly formed compound to clarify the meaning of clerk (which originally meant member of the clergy, but later gained the meaning of administrative assistant).
Clerical is a later formation and is now clerkly (or holyclerkly if one wants to be clear about the meaning).
demon	fiend	Many wicked fiends appeared in his dreams.	Demon is attested only twice in OE, one of which instances uses Latin case inflection. It seems that the Latin word was not in common use in OE, but became common as a result of later Latin influence.
demonic	fiendish	His fiendish appearance frightened me.
dictionary	wordbook	The student consulted the wordbook many times.
ecclesiastic(al)	churchly	Leave churchly matters to the priests.	For the use of ecclesiastic as a noun meaning cleric, see cleric.
ego	I-hood	He had a rather great I-hood.	Alter ego can be translated as other I-hood.
episcopal	bishoply	He oversaw the bishoply see.
et cetera	and so forth	He loved animals such as cats, dogs, and so forth.	Can be abbreviated to asf.
fraternal	brotherly	You ought to show him some brotherly love.
implore	beseech	I beseech you to lend me your assistance.	Past tense and past participle: besought.
insular	islandish	These goods come from an islandish kingdom.	Also used figuratively.
invitation	lathing	I received a lathing to go to the wedding.	Now a dialectal word.
invite	lathe	You have been lathed to my party.	Now a dialectal word.
lunar	moonly	Many cultures use moonly calendars.	From OE mōnelīc.
lunatic (adjective)	moonsick	You should not listen to that moonsick man.	Now an obsolete word.
The noun can be something like moonsickling.
Lunacy is a later formation and is now moonsickness.
manuscript	handwrit	The writer of this handwrit has messy handwriting.	Now a rare word and essentially a calque of the Latin word.
maternal	motherly	This ring belongs to my motherly grandfather.
monastery	minster	Many monks live in that minster.	Ultimately from the same source as monastery.
To refer to a monastery's church, one can use a compound such as minster-church.
nude	naked	The painting shows a naked woman.	Nudity is a later formation and is now nakedness.
papacy	popedom	The power of the popedom was quite limited.
papal	popely	The newspaper are talking about the upcoming popely visit.
participant	dealnimmer	All dealnimmers must follow the rules.
participate	dealnim	You should dealnim more in sports.	From OE dǣlniman (literally part-take and equivalent to partake) and probably a calque of the Latin word. A like formation is found in other Germanic languages, e.g., German teilnehmen.
Past tense: dealnam, past participle: dealnum.
participation	dealnimming	Your dealnimming in this case is highly appreciated.
paternal	fatherly	My fatherly grandmother came to this country years ago.
Pict	Pight	The Pights were a folk that lived in Scotland.	From ME piht (< OE Pihtas, the plural form), ultimately a Latin borrowing.
scribe (noun)	writer	The writer of the manuscript made several errors when copying the original.	Scribal is a later formation and is now writerly.
scribe (as in write)	write	He was tired of writing all day.
scribe (as in mark)	write	There is an interesting symbol written on this old horn.	From an old use of write.
semen	seed	The man let out all his seed.	For human semen, one can use manseed (an attested compound).
seminal	seedly	Plants develop seedly roots at an early stage.	Now an obsolete word. Also found in OE as sǣdlic.
solar (related to the sun)	sunly	This facility uses sunly energy.	Now a rare word. Compare with OE sunnlīc.
In some cases, it may be better to use sun and form a compound, e.g., solar year > sunyear.
sorority	sisterhood	The girl joined a sisterhood during her college years.	Or: susterhood (from ME suster; sister is from Norse).
Interestingly, sororal is not directly from a Latin word and is instead a later formation based on Latin soror. It can be translated as sisterly (or susterly).
subscribe (as in sign)	underwrite	He underwrote the will yesterday.
subscribe (as in arrange to receive)	underwrite	Do you wish to underwrite to our magazine?	Meaning extended here.
subscribe (as in agree, support)	underwrite	I do not underwrite the belief that we should spend more money.
subscription (as in signature)	underwriting	I can verify the underwriting of the document.
subscription (as in arrangement)	underwriting	You can access the article if you sign up for an underwriting.
translucent	throughshining	Light passed through the throughshining curtain.	Now an obsolete word.
universe	all	The all has so many mysteries left to be solved.	Attested in the OED as a noun meaning universe.
Or: worldall (an attested calque of German Weltall).