French word	English word	Example sentence	Notes
abandon (verb)	forsake	The man forsook many of his former ideals.	Past tense: forsook, past participle: forsaken.
abbacy	abbotship	The monk succeeded to the abbotship.
abbess	abboten	The abboten welcomed the visitor to the abbey.	See -ess.
abbey	abbotric	The abbotrich's members grew their own food.	Based on the obsolete word abbotric.
Or: abbotrich, with substitution of Norse-influenced -ric with native -rich.
able	findy	He was a very findy worker.	From ME findi (meaning apt, capable). Rhymes with windy.
Extended here to mean having the ability.
For enable (a later formation), we can use befindy (a newly formed derivative).
acquaint	kith	I am not kithed with that old man.	From ME kitthen.
acquaintance	kith	He is a dear kith of mine.	Now found only in the phrase kith and kin.
afraid	afeared	Children are often afeared of the dark.	Now a dialectal word. The past participle of afear (frighten), like how afraid is etymologically the past participle of the archaic verb affray.
age	eld	Charles was crowned king at the eld of 74.	Now an obsolete word. Also used as a verb with the same meaning as age (from ME elden).
air (as in the gas)	lift	I opened the window to let in some fresh lift.	Now a dialectal word. Akin to loft and normal lift, both of which are Norse borrowings.
We can extend this to be a verb meaning let fresh air in.
Air meaning melody appears to be a translation of Italian aria. As this is part of musical terminology, which is mainly Italian, one can borrow right from Italian and use aria.
Aerial is a later Latin borrowing and is now liftly.
For air meaning transmit on radio or television, one can use broadcast (which uses a Norse borrowing) or send out (verb) and sendout (noun).
air (as in feeling)	lift	I wanted this to have a lift of sophistication.	Air meaning feeling, atmosphere may be from a later French borrowing ultimately from Latin ager, but it may also be an extension of the regular meaning of air (as shown in the development of spirit and atmosphere), in which case we can extend lift for this use.
For put on airs, one can use a phrase such as lord it over others.
almond	amidal	Do you want to eat some amidals?	From OE amigdal (borrowed from Latin amygdalum). Pronounced /ˈæmɪdəl/.
Note that g in the OE form would have disappeared after i from natural sound changes (compare with the phonetic development of OE nigon > NE nine).
angel	ingel	One night, an ingel suddenly appeared before me.	From OE engel. Pronounced /ˈɪndʒəl/.
Or: ingle (rhyming with single, with /g/ generalized from certain OE inflections such as englas).
Angel is from the Old French form aungel.
angelic	ingelish	She had such an ingelish face.	Or: ingelly.
animal	deer	Cats and dogs are both deer.	From the word's original meaning.
Animal is also considered a Latin loanword.
The current specialized meaning of deer could be found contextually in OE, but the word was generally used to mean animal. The word began to lose its general meaning in Middle English because of French influence, as it was replaced with beast, which was later replaced with animal.
To refer to the four-legged creature, one can use hart, the original word for deer.
apart (as in separated)	asunder	How far asunder should those two be?
apart (as in into pieces)	asunder	The machine suddenly fell asunder.
apart (as in aside)	aside	All joking aside, what is your next move?
appease	befrith	The king managed to befrith his neighbor.	Based on ME frithen and German befriedigen. See peace.
Obsolete variant of appease: pease.
appeasement	befrithing	All attempts at befrithing soon came to an end.
appraise	aloave	The painting will soon be aloaved.	From OE gelofian, with change in prefix.
Obsolete variant of appraise: apprize.
archer	bowman	How many bowmen are out in the field?	The feminine is bowwoman.
archery	bowmanship	He practices his bowmanship every day.
arm (as in weapon)	weapon	The rebels picked up their weapons.	Extended here to mean coat of arms.
Firearm is now fireweapon (an attested compound).
arm (as in supply with weapons)	weapon	We must weapon ourselves to prepare for danger.	Now a rare use of the word as a verb.
army	hear	He decided to join the hear when the war began.	From ME here. Rhymes with bear. Also used figuratively.
arrival	lending	I have been expecting your lending for some time.	See arrive.
arrive	lend	By the time the storm passes, we will have already lent at Rome.	Now an obsolete word.
art	craft	The craft of conversation is hard to master.	Some uses of craft that refer to more manual activity may be better shown with handicraft or handiwork, so arts and crafts can be replaced with something like crafts and handiworks.
Artful is now crafty (in the meaning of guileful) or craftful (in the meaning of skilled).
Artless is now uncrafty (in the meaning of guileless) or craftless (in the meaning of unskilled).
artifice (as in guile)	craftiness	The story is full of action and craftiness.	Craft or cunning also works.
artifice (as in artful trick)	crafty prat	He used many crafty prats to gain influence.	Prat is now a dialectal word meaning trick.
artificial	craftly	Her laugh sounded quite craftly.	From ME craftli (with the meaning of skillful). Meaning extended here. Compare with German künstlich.
In some contexts, manmade also works.
artisan	craftsman	The craftsmen were busy at work in the workshop.	Artisanal is a later formation and is now craftsmanly.
artist	crafter	Picasso was a famous crafter.	Meaning broadened here to refer to someone of the fine arts. Compare with German Künstler.
Artistic is a later formation and is now crafterish (compare with German künstlerisch).
aunt	modry	Go help your dear modry out.	From ME moddrie (originally meaning maternal aunt).
autumn	fall	Fall comes before winter.	The adjectival form, autumnal, is a later borrowing from Latin and is translated as fallish.
avenge	wreak	I must wreak my father by capturing his murderer.	From an old use of wreak.
await	abide	I am anxiously abiding my test results.	From an old use of abide.
bacon	spitch	For breakfast, he had spitch and eggs.	From ME spich.
banish	fordrive	The king fordrove him from the country for his treason.	From ME fordriven.
Banishment is a later formation and is now fordriving.
baptise, baptize	fullow	He was fullowed as an infant.	Now an obsolete word.
baptism	fullought	This water will be used for the fullought.	From ME fulloght. Ought here rhymes with drought.
baptist	fulloughter	Hast thou heard of John the Fulloughter?	From ME fulluhtere.
Or: fullower (see baptize).
baptistery, baptistry	fulloughtstow	The fulloughtstow was in that part of the church.	From OE fullwihtstōw. Stow here rhymes with flow.
baron	thane	The king gathered a council of thanes.	Thane referred to a certain kind of nobleman in Anglo-Saxon England and is used here as a native equivalent of baron (compare with the use of earl for count in the British peerage).
For the feminine, see baroness.
Baron is a common Germanic borrowing.
baronage, barony	thanedom	The men were driven out of the thanedom.
baroness	thanen	The thanen managed to get her husband to listen.	See -ess.
Baroness is a common Germanic borrowing.
If one is willing to borrow baron, one can use baronen (a newly formed derivative).
beast (as in animal)	deer	Oxen are deer of burden.	See animal.
Bestiary is a later Latin borrowing and is now deerbook.
beast (as in brute)	wildling	He's nothing more than a filthy wildling.	Extended here to its figurative uses.
beauty	sheenness	There was no man who was not entranced by her sheenness.	From the old adjective sheen.
Beautiful is thus sheen.
beef (food)	rotherflesh	He enjoys eating rotherflesh.	Based on dialectal rother meaning bovine.
Or: rothermeat.
Can be shortened to: rother.
beef (as in bovine)	rother	How many rothers do you own?
beef (as in muscular brawn)	flesh	You need some more flesh in your body!	Or: meat.
beef (as in complaint)	gripe	What's his gripe with me?
beef (as in complain)	gripe	What are you griping about now?
belfry	belltor	The assistant ran to the belltor and rang the bell.	Based on bell tower. Tor is from OE torr.
Or: bellroom (if referring to the part of a bell tower where the bell is hung).
blame (noun)	wite	You simply cannot lay all the wite on her.	Now a dialectal word.
blame (verb)	wite	He wited me for the incident.	Now a dialectal word.
boil	seethe	The first step is to seethe the water.	From the word's original meaning. Also used in its figurative uses, e.g., he was boiling with anger > he was seething with anger.
Extended here to have the same meanings as the noun boil, e.g., the water comes to a boil > the water comes to a seethe.
Boiler is now seether.
For boil (as in inflamed swelling), the word is native (OE bȳl), but bile, the expected modern form and now a dialectal variant, was later altered to boil apparently from association with the French word, so the word to replace boil for inflamed swelling is bile.
bracelet	bigh	He wore a golden bigh.	From ME begh.
breach	britch	I had to go fix the britch in the wall.	From ME briche (< OE bryce). The modern form shows influence from French breche.
Extended here to be a verb.
burglar	housebreaker	According to the witness, the housebreaker fled after hearing the siren ring.	Burgle and burglarize are later formations and can be translated as something like break into houses.
burglary	housebreaking	The man was sentenced for housebreaking.	Or: housebritch (based on OE hūsbryċe; note that breach is French).
butcher (noun)	flesher	I went to the local flesher to buy some flesh.	From an old use of the word.
For its figurative meaning of murderer, one can also use slayer or slaughterer (as slaughter is from Norse).
butcher (as in kill)	slay	The animals were rounded up to be slain later.	Or: slaughter (which is from Norse).
butcher (as in botch, ruin)	mishandle	Unfortunately, the director mishandled the ending.
butler (as in manservant in charge of wine)	birler	The host asked the birler to pour out drinks.	From ME birler.
butler (as in chief manservant)	housesteward	I have hired a housesteward to manage the mansion.	Steward by itself can also work.
camel	olvend	He rode an olvend through the desert.	From ME olvende.
Camel is attested in late Old English, but became the usual word for the animal from influence of the French and Latin word.
Other Germanic languages except Icelandic have borrowed the Latin word for this.
canon (as in clergyman)	canonic	The canonic was asked to watch over him.	From OE canonic, a Latin borrowing.
captain	headling	The sailors obeyed their headling's orders.	From ME hevedling (meaning chief, leader).
Other words may work for this such as shiplord for sea captain.
car	wain	I parked my wain in my garage.	Now an archaic word. Meaning extended to refer to modern cars.
carpenter	timberwright	He wanted to work as a timberwright.	From ME timber-wright. Extended here to be a verb of the same meaning.
carpentry	timberwork	The timberwork of this building is impressive.
castle	fasten	The fasten was such a beautiful place to look around.	From OE fæsten. The OE word castel meant town, village, and the meaning of fortification is from the French word.
cattle	neat	The herdsmen were told to drive all the neat.	Now an archaic word.
Note that a cattle herder is called a neatherd.
An individual cattle animal is a neat or a rother (now a dialectal word).
cause (as in source, origin)	inting	What is the inting of his sickness?	From OE intinga. Rhymes with hinting.
One can also use orsake, a calque of German Ursache. The stress is on the first syllable.
Because is a later formation, and one way to translate it is forthat (based on the archaic phrase for that). Other words include since and as.
For because of, one way to translate it is along of (now a dialectal phrase and unrelated to the usual word along). Another way is owing to.
Causal is a later Latin borrowing and is now intingly or orsakely.
cause (as in purpose, ideal)	sake	I work for the sake of bettering mankind.
cause (as in matter, dispute)	sake	The two parties took their sake to the judge.	From an old use of sake.
cause (verb)	inting	What intinged the earthquake?	Extension of inting to be a verb.
One can also extend orsake to be a verb, e.g., I caused the fire > I orsaked the fire. The stress is on the first syllable.
cease	blin	He never blins to amaze me.	Now an obsolete word. Past tense: blan, past participle: blun.
In many cases, stop works as well, e.g., cease that racket > stop that racket.
cedar	cheader	She went to take a look at the cheader tree.	From OE ceder (a borrowing from Latin).
celestial	heavenly	I looked at the heavenly body through my telescope.
cent	penny	This item costs one penny, but that one costs ten pence.	The plural is pence when used for amounts, but pennies when used for individual coins.
certain (as in sure)	sicker	I am sicker that he is wrong about this one.	Now a dialectal word.
certain (as in unspecified)	sicker	A sicker man once said that a fool and his money are soon parted.	Meaning extended here. Compare with Dutch zeker, which means certain in both uses.
certain (pronoun)	some	I have read some of his works.
certainty	sickerness	He knew with full sickerness that he had the right answer.
chair (furniture)	settle	He bought a swivel settle for his room.	From an old use of settle, which formerly meant chair, seat.
For the modern meaning of long bench, one can say long settle.
chair (as in seat of authority)	settle	You should report your complaints to the settle.	Meaning extended here.
Also extended here to be a verb with the same meaning.
For the one holding the position, in addition to settle, settleman (feminine settlewoman) can be used (based on chairman and chairwoman).
chair (as in professorship)	settle	He has held a settle of mathematics for many years.	Meaning extended here.
chapter (as in section of a text)	capitle	There are twenty capitles in this book.	From ME capitle (< OE capitol, a borrowing from Latin).
chapter (as in period of time)	capitle	This marked a new capitle in my life.	Meaning extended here.
chapter (as in assembly of ecclesiastics)	capitle	The religious order held a chapter this morning.	From one meaning of ME capitle.
chapter (as in branch)	capitle	Our organization will open a new capitle in this city.	Meaning extended here.
chariot	cratwain	The Romans liked to race in cratwains.	From OE crætwǣn.
chattel	owngood	The animals are legally considered owngoods.	Based on the use of goods to refer to movable property, with own added here to clarify the meaning of goods (which can also refer to wares).
checker (game)	draft / draught	Would you like to play a game of drafts with me?	From the British use of draughts.
checker, check (as in design resembling a checkerboard)	draftboard / draughtboard	He wore a shirt with a draftboard pattern.	Based on the use of checkerboard to refer to the pattern. Extended here to be a verb.
cherry	chirse	The path was covered with chirse blossoms.	From OE cirse. Rhymes with hers.
chevalier	knight	The lord was protected by several knights.
chief (as in leading figure)	head	I have to report to the village head about this.	Other words such as leader and foreman may also work and differ in connotation.
Extended here to its use in heraldry.
chief (as in most important)	main	What is the main reason for this change?
chief (as in highest in rank)	head	He is the head cook of this kitchen.
chieftain	headman	The five tribes' headmen gathered yesterday evening.	For the specific meaning of tribe leader, one can also use stemshead (see tribe) as a calque of Dutch stamhoofd.
chivalrous	knightly	His behavior was certainly not knightly.
chivalry	knightliness	Sadly, knightliness is a foreign concept to him.
choice (noun)	kir	I had no kir but to follow his orders.	From ME kire.
choice (adjective)	chise	He chose a chise place for dinner.	From ME chis. Rhymes with nice.
Christian	Christen	My neighbor is a Christen.	Now a dialectal word (from OE cristen).
Christianity	Christendom	Missionaries introduced Christendom to Japan.
citizen	borougher	The boroughers of New York have chosen a new mayor.	Newly formed derivative (see city). Also used here to mean citizen of a country.
city	borough	I am part of this borough's government.	Rhymes with furrow.
For borough meaning administrative district, one can use ward.
clergy	holyclerkship	Only members of the holyclerkship are allowed to enter.	Based on holyclerk, a newly formed compound to translate cleric, a Latin borrowing, to disambiguate clerk meaning cleric from the now usual meaning of administrative assistant.
cloister	clauster	I saw a few nuns walking in the clauster.	From OE clauster (a borrowing from Latin).
Extended here to be a verb of the same meaning.
coffin	lichchest	The body was set carefully in the lichchest.	Calque of Icelandic líkkista. See corpse.
Extended here to be a verb with the same meaning as coffin.
coin	mint	How many mints do you have in your pocket?	From an old use of the word. Also used as a verb with the same meaning.
color, colour	blee	Red is my favorite blee.	Now an archaic word. Also extended to be a verb with the same meaning.
Hue is similar in meaning, but usually refers to a specific property of color.
command (as in order)	bid	Do as I bid!	Past tense: bade, past participle: bidden.
The noun is bidding.
command (as in have control over)	wield	The general wielded a host of soldiers.	From an old use of wield.
Also used as a noun meaning control. Extended here to also mean body of troops.
command (as in have solid possession of)	wield	No political party wielded a majority.
command (as in mastery, good control)	wield	His wield of English is impressive.
command (as in overlook)	overlook	The castle overlooked the city.
commander	bidder	The bidder was strict with his men.
commandment	bidding	We must follow God's ten biddings.	Religious use taken from ME.
common (as in shared)	meanly	We both have a meanly goal.	From ME menelich.
Or: meansome, a calque of German gemeinsam. The adjective may have existed in English, as shown by the OE derivative gemǣnsumian (share, impart).
One can also use mean, as this is its original meaning, and it later came to mean lowly, shabby, nasty (essentially a negative extension of common).
For commonplace (a later calque of Latin locus communis), we can form a new compound and use meanstead (see place).
For common sense, we can use mother wit.
For commonwealth, we can form meanwealth.
common (as in usual, ordinary)	wonly	Thinking like that is a very wonly mistake.	From ME iwonelich (derived from won meaning custom, habit). Similar to German gewöhnlich and Dutch gewoon.
Note that won rhymes with sun.
Everyday also works in some contexts.
commonality (as in shared feature)	meanliness	These lands have many meanlinesses.	The plural also replaces commons meaning shared resource as in tragedy of the commons.
commonality, commonalty (as in body of commoners)	wonliness	The wonliness wondered at the sight of the knight.	See commoner.
Some historical uses of commonalty meaning general group would probably be translated the same way as community.
commoner	wonly	A noble seldom marries a wonly.	Extension of wonly to be a noun.
The plural also replaces commons meaning common folk as in House of Commons.
community	meanship	The village has a very friendly meanship.	Calque of German Gemeinschaft.
concord	onereadness	The two parties eventually reached onereadness.	From OE ānrǣdnes. Read here is used in its archaic meaning of counsel, advice.
Extended here to other meanings of concord such as agreement, treaty and grammatical concord.
For the rare use of concord as a verb, one can say something like be at onereadness, e.g., both men were at onereadness on this matter.
concordant	oneread	All the critics were oneread about the work's weaknesses.	From OE ānrǣd.
concubine	cheaves	The noble had a son by a cheaves.	From ME cheves. Rhymes with eaves.
condemn	fordeem	The men were fordeemed to death.	From ME fordemen. Extended here to also mean deem unfit for use.
Condemnation is a later Latin borrowing and is now fordeeming.
confess	andet	I would like to andet all my sins.	From OE andettan. Stress is on the first syllable.
confession	andeting	He made a andeting about his crimes.
confessor	andeter	The andeter told me not to worry about it.
conquer	overwin	The Normans overwon England.	Now an archaic word.
conqueror	overwinner	The country was now ruled by a foreign overwinner.
conquest	overwinning	The emperor had plans for overwinning.
corpse	lich	The lady's lich was buried in that spot of the graveyard.	Now an archaic word.
One can also use licham from ME lichame.
For some older uses of corpse that refer to a living body, body works.
count (as in determine the number of)	tell	No one can tell all the stars.	This old meaning of tell is still found in untold and in teller.
Reckon has a similar meaning with the connotation of calculate.
For the meaning of both narrate and count, compare with the meanings of account and recount.
count (as in be of importance)	tell	Make every attempt tell.	One can also use reckon.
count (as in regard)	tell	Tell yourself lucky for not being at the site of the disaster last night.	From an old use of tell.
One can also use reckon.
count (as in include, take into account)	reckon	There are six members (seven if we reckon me).
count (as in depend)	reckon	We are reckoning on his assistance for the project.
count (as in process of counting)	telling	They began the telling of the votes.
count (as in quantity, total)	tale	What's the final tale of all the members?	This old meaning of tale is now archaic.
count (as in charge, accusation)	tale	He has been arrested on several tales.	From one meaning of ME tale.
count (nobility)	earl	I besought the earl to help me.	Used as the equivalent of count in the British peerage.
For the feminine, see countess.
countess	earlen	The earlen has lost her book.	See -ess.
country	land	I have never visited any Asian lands.	Also used for country referring to a rural area (as opposed to an urban area like a city).
county (as in an administrative division)	shire	The land is split into many different shires.
county (as in a count's domain)	earldom	The earldom was quite small.
court (noun)	hoff	I have been asked to go to the king's hoff.	From OE hof. Meaning extended also to court of law.
court (as in woo)	woo	The man wooed his lover with many gifts.	Also used figuratively to mean seek support of.
court (as in try to obtain)	seek	The courtier secretly sought political power.	Or: seech (since seek shows Norse influence). Past tense and past participle of seech is still sought.
court (as in attract)	draw	That man always draws controversy with his remarks.
courtier	hoffling	The hofflings have wondered what the king is planning.	Calque of German Höfling.
cousin	swire	I had dinner with my swire yesterday.	From OE geswigra apparently meaning male cousin (glossing Latin consobrinus). Extended here to refer to female cousins.
creation	making	Marvel at my latest making!	Create is a later formation from Latin and is now make.
creator	maker	Who is the maker of this invention?
creature	shaft	All the shafts fled upon hearing a loud noise.	From ME shafte.
Wight can also be used, but is now generally used to refer to supernatural creatures or to human beings.
crime	firren	Murder is a serious firren.	From OE firen. Also used in the broader meaning of shameful act.
Misdeed can work, but is the word for bad deed in general.
criminal (adjective)	firrenly	What he has done is a firrenly offense.
criminal (noun)	firrener	This is a place for convicted firreners.
crown (as in what a king wears)	kinghelm	The king's kinghelm is golden.	From OE cynehelm, with substitution of king for the first element.
Also used as a verb meaning place a crown on (both literally and figuratively).
The word appears to be a common Germanic borrowing from Latin and is seldom attested in OE in the form of corōna. The OE word is not the source of modern crown, as the modern pronunciation can only be traced back to the Old French word. If the OE borrowing had survived, it would have become something like *corn; the phonetic development would have gone something like this: corōna > corene > corne > corn.
crown (as in the top of something)	top	We've reached the top of the hill.	For top of the head, one can use noll (now a dialectal word from OE hnol).
For more specific uses of crown, one can use compounds, e.g., toothtop for a dental crown.
Also used as a verb meaning cover the top of.
cry (as in shout)	roop	The man rooped for help.	From ME rop (< OE hrōp) and ropen (< OE hrōpan).
cry (as in shed tears)	weep	Jesus wept.
cuckold (noun)	hornbearer	He was ridiculed for having become a hornbearer.	Semantic calque of Dutch hoorndrager. Based on the use (not only in English but also in other languages) of horns as a characteristic of cuckolds.
Cuckoldry is a later formation and is now hornbearerdom.
cuckold (verb)	horn	The wife horned her husband.	From an obsolete use of the verb horn.
cuckoo	yeak	He was awakened by a yeak.	From ME yek.
Cuckoo is probably from Old French cucu, but it should be noted that in many other languages, similar-sounding words have been formed based on the cuckoo's call. The replacement of the native word with an onomatopoeic word has happened in the West Germanic languages, but not in the North Germanic languages.
cumin	kimmen	This recipe uses kimmen as a spice.	From OE cymen. The modern form is from French.
dairy	deyhouse	The store ordered a lot of milk from the deyhouse.	Now a dialectal word. Dairy (from Anglo-French daierie) contains the native word dey, so dairy is etymologically dey-ery.
For dairy referring to dairy foods, one can say something like deyhouse foods, e.g., I started to buy more deyhouse foods.
dam (as in an animal's mother)	motherdeer	This is the horse's motherdeer.	Calque of German Muttertier, from mother + deer (in its old meaning of animal).
Older uses referring to any mother can be translated as mother.
dame (as in woman)	lady	Who does that lady think she is?
dame (title)	burd	Burd Ellen retired from sailing years ago.	Now a poetic and obsolete word from ME birde (noblewoman). It appears to be a development from ME birde (< OE gebyrde, birth) or OE byrde (well-born).
Used here as the feminine equivalent of sir for knights.
For older uses of dame referring to a woman in authority, lady can also be used.
damn	warry	The zealot declared that the man would be warried for his sins.	Now an obsolete word. Rhymes with sorry.
Extended here to the coarse uses of damn, e.g., shut that damn(ed) door > shut that warried door, God damn it! > God warry it!.
damnation	warrying	He did not want to undergo eternal warrying.
damsel	maiden	The knight saw a maiden standing by a tree.
danger	freekenness	The sign warned of freekenness up ahead.	From OE frēcennes.
The verb endanger is a later formation and is now freeken (from OE frēcnian).
dangerous	freeken	He was working in a freeken line of work.	From OE frēcne.
dean	decanon	The university decanon met with various administrators.	From OE decanon (one in charge of ten monks), as this was the original sense of dean.
OE decanon is used instead of OE decan since the latter would have become deacon, which would have been confused with the existing word deacon.
debt	shild	I must work to pay off my shild.	From OE scyld. Rhymes with wild.
debtor	shilder	She was worried that the shilder would soon come.	From shild + -er.
decease (verb)	queal	Sadly, she quole last year.	From ME quelen. Past tense: quole, past participle: quolen. Used here as a more formal word for die.
Deceased is thus quolen.
decease (noun)	quealing	The king's quealing caused his son to inherit the throne.	Used here as a more formal word for death.
defiance	withstanding	That was an act of withstanding against the government.
defy (as in resist)	withstand	How dare you withstand your superior!	The adjectival form defiant is a later French borrowing and is now withstanding, e.g., withstanding rebels.
defy (as in dare)	dare	He dared us to name a better book.
deity (as in god)	god	Who now worships the gods of ancient Greece?	Note that for a goddess, the word is now gidden (from OE gyden).
deity (as in divinity)	godhood	He became so powerful that he began to have delusions of godhood.
denizen	abider	I soon encountered a few abiders of this place.	From an old use of abide meaning reside.
Or: dweller (in which dwell meaning reside may show Norse influence).
depart	forthfare	He soon forthfared to the station.	From ME forthfaren. Also used for the euphemistic meaning of die.
departure	forthfare	I received news of her forthfare.	From ME forthfare (meaning departure from life). Used here in the literal sense as well.
deprive	bereave	I was bereft of my freedom.	Past tense and past participle are bereft.
Deprivation is a later Latin borrowing and is now bereaving.
desert (geography)	weesten	The weesten was hard to travel through.	From ME westen.
desert (as in just deserts)	forthaining	He has been given his just forthainings.	See deserve.
In some cases, earning can work.
desert (as in abandon)	forlet	I felt betrayed when my friend forlet me.	Now an obsolete word.
deserve	forthain	I do not think that he forthains his fortune.	Semantic calque of German verdienen (see serve).
In some cases, earn can work.
desist	aswike	The soldiers have been told to aswike from firing.	From ME aswiken.
Desistance is a later French borrowing and is now aswiking.
despair	wanhope	Recent events have made him wanhope at the future.	Now an obsolete word using the obsolete prefix wan- (showing deficiency). Used as both a noun and a verb.
die (singular of dice)	tavelstone	He rolled the tavelstone.	From OE tæflstān.
Extended here to its architectural use for a cubical part of a pedestal (since its use in architecture refers to its cubical shape).
die (as in embossing stamp)	stample	He used a stample to stamp his coins.	Newly formed derivative using stamp (probably from OE *stampian).
Or: stemple (using OE stempan). Compare with Dutch stempel.
die (as in device for cutting something into a particular shape)	carvel	Many manufacturing processes use carvels.	Newly formed derivative.
dig	delve	Let's go delving for buried treasure.	From an old use of delve. Used for both literal and figurative senses.
Dig is probably from Anglo-French *diguer, according to the MED.
The noun is now delving.
dime	tenpence	I have two pennies and three tenpences in my pocket.
discord	twireadness	There was twireadness between the two parties.	From OE twirǣdness. Read here is used in its archaic meaning of counsel, advice.
Extended here to its musical meaning.
For the archaic use of discord as a verb, one can say something like be at twireadness, e.g., the advisor was at twireadness with the leader.
discordant	twiread	The discussion was full of twiread opinions.	From ME twired.
diocesan (adjective)	bishopricly	The bishopricly leaders gathered yesterday.	See diocese.
diocesan (as in leader of a diocese)	bishop	I consulted a bishop yesterday.
diocesan (as in one of the clergy of a diocese)	bishopricker	The bishop was concerned about his bishoprickers.
diocese	bishopric	The bishopric owns this building.	Or: bishoprich, with substitution of Norse-influenced -ric with native -rich.
Archdiocese is a later formation and is now archbishopric (or archbishoprich for a form without Norse influence).
disciple	learningman	Judas was the learningman who betrayed Jesus.	From OE leornungmann. The feminine is learningwoman.
disloyal	lease-hearted	The king was murdered by his lease-hearted minister.	See false.
One can also use untrue or lease if the context is clear, e.g., an untrue/lease man.
disloyalty	lease-heartedness	The traitor shall be punished for his lease-heartedness.
dismal	dreary	Economics is sometimes called the dreary science.
disobedience	unhearsomeness	The soldier showed unhearsomeness to his superior.	See obedient.
Obsolete form of disobedience: disobeisance.
disobedient	unhearsome	The master punished his unhearsome servant.	See obedient.
Obsolete form of disobedient: disobeisant.
disobey	not hearsome	How dare you not hearsome your orders!	See obey.
divination	soothsaying	The queen was fascinated with the magician's soothsaying.
divine (adjective)	godly	He had never seen such godly powers before.
divine (as in member of the clergy)	churchman	Samuel was such a good churchman.
divine (as in theologian)	godloresman	I consulted the godloresman as part of my research.	See theologian.
divine (verb)	soothsay	He claimed to have the power to soothsay the future.	Rare word that was a backformation from soothsayer/saying. Extended here to mean find or guess as if by divination.
diviner	soothsayer	I besought the soothsayer to tell me what would befall.
divinity (as in godliness)	godliness	He wore a veil to hide his godliness from the mortals.
divinity (as in divine being)	godly being	All the minor godly beings gathered.
divinity (as in theology)	godlore	He is a doctor of godlore.	Newly formed compound.
doubt	tween	I tween that what you say is true.	From OE twēon and twēonian.
dozen	twelvesome	I have two twelvesomes of eggs.	Dozen appears to be used in other Germanic languages except Icelandic.
dragon	drake	The knight slew the mighty drake.	From an old use of the word. Drake is ultimately a Germanic borrowing from Latin.
Note that this is unrelated to drake meaning male duck.
duchess	hartowen	Where has the hartowen gone?	See duke and -ess.
duchy	hartowdom	The hartow sought to expand his hartowdom.	See duke.
duke	hartow	For his heroism, he was given the title of hartow.	From OE heretoga (literally army-leader). Based on German Herzog.
For the feminine, see duchess.
Or: hertow (showing the regular development of er). The ar form (unattested in Middle English) seems to be done here by analogy with harbor, etymologically a compound using OE here and meaning army-shelter.
The adjectival form, ducal, is a later French borrowing and is now hartowly.

eager	keen	He was keen to leave already.
eagle	erne	One day, I saw an erne flying above my house.	From the word's original meaning. For its current meaning of sea eagle, sea erne can be used.
emperor	coaser	Octavian was the first Roman coaser.	From OE cāsere.
For the feminine, see empress.
empire	coaserdom	The Roman coaserdom stretched from Britain to Egypt.
empress	coasern	The coasern stayed inside the castle all day.	From OE cāsern, equivalent to coaser + -en (see -ess).
enchant	begale	The witch begaled the ring with a special spell.	From ME bigalen.
enchanter	begaler	I had to pay the begaler a hefty sum.	For the feminine, see enchantress.
enchantment	begaling	A mighty begaling had been cast on the ring.
enchantress	begaleren	The begaleren cast a spell on him out of anger.	See -ess.
enemy	foe	I suspect that my foes are plotting against me.
engender	breed	His misdeeds have bred widespread anger.
enjoy	neet	The man neeted good health.	From OE nēotan meaning have the benefit of. Extended here to mean take pleasure in.
One can also use the expression find selth in (see joy).
Enjoyment is a later formation and is now neeting.
enmity	foeship	The foeship between the two has grown.	See enemy. Now an archaic word.
ennoble	athel	The king atheled him last year.	From OE æþelian. See noble.
enrich	richen	The new technology has richened our lives.
entire (as in whole)	whole	The whole team has shown up.	Entirely is a later formation and is now wholly.
entire (as in intact)	whole	Thankfully, the relics have remained whole.
entire (as in uncastrated)	unafired	He was gifted with an unafired horse.	Formed from OE afȳran (castrate).
entirety (as in wholeness)	wholeness	The plan has not been accepted in its wholeness.
entirety (as in whole)	whole	The whole of last month was spent on research.
envenom	beyelster	I beyelstered the dagger carefully.	From be- + yelster. See venom.
envious	evestful	His success made her quite evestful.	From OE æfestful (see envy).
envy	evest	His new car filled his neighbor with evest.	From ME evest. Rhymes with leavest.
Also used as a verb.
espy	sight	He sighted something hiding in the bushes.
esquire (as in man of gentle birth)	goodlord	The country club was run by a goodlord.	From an obsolete word referring to local nobility.
esquire (title)	goodlord	This letter is addressed to John Smith, Goodlord.	Extended here to be a title mainly used by lawyers.
estrange	fremdledge	He was fremdledged from the club.	From OE fremedlǣcan (see strange).
Eucharist	housel	This was the first time when I received housel.	Now an archaic word.
evangelist	gospeler	I saw a gospeler on a TV show yesterday.	Also spelled gospeller.
example	bisen	Could you show me a bisen of how this theory can be used?	From ME bisne. Pronounced /ˈbaɪzən/.
exchequer	mathomhouse	The king was alarmed at the state of the mathomhouse.	From OE māðumhūs (treasure-house).
Note that exchequer originally meant chessboard, and chess is deemed an acceptable borrowing here (see chess above). However, since the concept of chessboard is easily translatable, this word is not borrowed here, unlike chess.
exemplar	forebisen	The king was a forebisen of good leadership.	From ME forebisne. The latter half is pronounced /ˈbaɪzən/.
Exemplary is a later Latin borrowing and is now forebisenly.
exemplify	bisen	The holy man bisened many kinds of virtue.	From ME bisnen meaning symbolize, betoken. Extended here to mean be an example of.
Pronounced /ˈbaɪzən/.
face (as in countenance)	anlet	One's anlet can reveal more than one's words.	From ME anlet.
Facial is a later Latin borrowing and is now anletly (adjective) and anlet cleansing (noun).
face (as in surface)	anlet	How many anlets does a cube have?
face (as in be positioned toward)	behold	The statue is beholding the north.	From an old use of behold.
face (as in look at seriously)	behold	You must behold the facts and accept that we are in danger.	Meaning extended here.
face (as in confront in competition)	abide	I will abide him in the next round.	From an old use of abide.
face (as in present itself)	beset	What would you do if you were beset with a crisis?
face (as in cover the surface)	overlay	The walls were overlaid with marble.
fairy	fay	The little boy believed that fays existed.	Fay is deemed an acceptable French borrowing here (see fay above).
Faerie is a deliberately archaic spelling of the word. In its meaning of fairyland, fayland can be used instead.
For fairy tale, one can use fay tale or the attested phrase wonder tale.
faith	troth	Dost thou have troth in God?	Now an archaic word.
falcon	falken	The noble loves to hunt sport with his falken.	From OE *fealcen (suggested by the inflected form fealcnes). Related to the French word, which is from Latin.
The modern word is evidently from French, as the earliest attestations in Middle English can only be from the Old French form. In any case, the Old English word would have become *falken and thus would be identical to the modern word. However, the spelling needs to be altered, as falcon shows Latin influence. Moreover, the modern pronunciation should be something like /ˈfɔːkən/ (which in fact is a traditional pronunciation of falcon), as /l/ in falken would have been later lost through normal sound changes (compare with the phonetic development of talk).
false	lease	One should not say lease things.	From ME les. Rhymes with peace.
False is found in OE only once in a dubious instance, so the modern word is clearly from the French form.
False appears in other Germanic languages, though with a different final consonant. In German, the adjective was apparently borrowed from Old French fals, the modern form (falsch) showing influence from the Middle Dutch form valsc (probably an Old French borrowing, with the final s altered to -sc by analogy with native adjectives ending with -s/sc) and possibly the related verb fälschen (forge, counterfeit). The North Germanic languages seem to have borrowed the word from Middle Low German, e.g., Danish falsk, Icelandic falskur.
falsify	leasen	He leasened his results.	Newly formed derivative.
fame	lise	His heroic deeds brought him much lise.	From OE hlīsa. Rhymes with wise.
Famed is thus lised (attested as ME alised).
To avoid potential ambiguity with lies, one can say lisefulness.
famous	liseful	He became liseful for his works.	From OE hlīsful.
For a word meaning not famous (since unliseful means infamous), one can use liseless (a newly formed derivative).
fault (as in blame, failing)	shild	It's your shild that we lost!	See debt.
Extended here to broadly mean faulty move in contexts like tennis.
fault (as in err, do wrong)	shildy	I shildied when I fell for temptation.	From OE scyldigian (to sin).
fault (as in blame, find fault in)	beshildy	He was beshildied for his lack of vigilance.	Suggested by ME beshild (accused). Compare with German beschuldigen.
fault (geology)	britch	It turned out that I was living near an active britch.	Meaning extended here and based on Dutch breuk. See breach.
Extended here to be a verb meaning produce a fault.
feast	simble	He held a simble to celebrate the occasion.	From OE symbel (noun) and symblan (verb). Also used in the religious meaning.
Feast was also borrowed from French or Latin by Dutch and German; the North Germanic languages (except Icelandic) appear to have borrowed the word from German.
fee	meedshat	The performer demanded quite a high meedshat.	From OE mēdsceatt (payment in reward).
festal	simblely	He was in a simblely mood.	From OE symbellīc.
Also used for festive, a later Latin borrowing.
festival	simbletide	The Romans held many simbletides.	From OE symbeltīd.
feud	faught	The faught between the two families began long ago.	From OE fǣhþ. For the phonetic development, compare with ME aughte (possessions) < OE ǣht. Note that the sequence hþ later became ht.
For the verb, one can use a phrase such as be in a faught with.
fig (fruit)	fike	There are many fikes in this orchard.	From ME fik (< OE fīc, a borrowing of Latin fīcus).
flower	blossom	There are many kinds of blossoms in the garden.	Also used as a verb with the same meaning as flower.
flour	meal	I bought a bag of meal for baking the cake.	Extended here to be a verb with the same meaning as flour.
folly (as in foolishness)	dweaseness	He failed to see the dweaseness in his actions.	See fool.
folly (as in extravagent building)	thrumbuilding	He thought to build a thrumtbuilding.	Newly formed compound using thrum (see majesty). Based on German Prachtbau.
The plural follies to refer to a theatrical revue is a recent borrowing from French.
fool (as in silly person)	dwease	You are such a dwease for believing that.	From OE dwǣs (meaning foolish). Rhymes with fleece.
Extended here to be a noun.
Fool referring to the dessert is of uncertain origin and may be the same word as this.
fool (as in jester)	merryman	The court merryman entertained the guests.
fool (as in make a fool of)	bedwease	He bedweased her with his tricks.	Newly formed derivative.
fool (as in jest, joke)	play	I was only playing.
foreign	eltheedy	I once traveled to an eltheedy land.	From OE elþēodig.
Outlandish originally meant this, and its current meaning of bizarre is essentially a negative extension of foreign.
If the meaning is clear, one can also use fremd (a dialectal word meaning strange, unfamiliar).
Foreigner is a later formation and is now eltheeder or outlander.
forest	wold	Many creatures live in this wold.	Now an archaic word, with meaning taken from ME.
For the verb and afforest (a later Latin borrowing), we can form a new derivative and use bewold.
form (as in shape)	shape	Genius comes in many shapes.	Used broadly to refer to appearance, e.g., verb forms > verb shapes.
Also used as a verb with the same meaning as form.
The adjectival form, formal, is a later borrowing from Latin and is translated as shapeful (now a rare word, with meaning extended), which is used since shapely now means beautiful, well-shaped.
form (as in empty document)	sheet	Please fill out this sheet.	To be more specific, one can use a modifier, e.g., tax forms > tax sheets.
France	Frankland	The merchant stayed in Frankland for a few weeks.	From OE Francland.
fraternity	brotherhood	The brethren of the brotherhood shall meet again next week.
fresh	fersh	I drank of the fersh river water.	From ME fersch (compare with Dutch vers). The form with metathesis appears to be from influence of French fresche since no such form is attested in OE, but OE fersc is well attested.
friar	brother	One day, a brother from the order came to my home.
fruit	wassom	In this orchard, many wassoms are grown.	From ME wastme. Rhymes with blossom.
Also used figuratively.
Or: ovet (from ME ovet) or its later dialectal variant ovest (which has the specialized meaning of acorn and oak mast).
future (noun)	tocome	He claims that he can see into the tocome.	From ME tocome (< OE tōcyme). Similar to German Zukunft and Dutch toekomst.
The stress is on the first syllable, which is pronounced as too.
future (adjective)	tocoming	I will keep you informed about tocoming developments.
gaiety	mirth	The party was full of mirth.
garden	leighton	I took in the beauty of the leighton.	From ME leightoun.
Garden is ultimately from Proto-Germanic.
gardener	leightoner	I asked the leightoner what had happened.
gay (as in merry)	merry	Poetry is sometimes called the merry science.
gay (as in bright)	bright	Don we now our bright apparel.
gay (as in homosexual)	ilklusting	Some ancient Greeks are said to have engaged in ilklusting acts.	Semantic calque of homosexual.
Ilk is an obsolete word for same, and lust refers to sexual desire.
Or: samelusting (as same is a Norse borrowing).
The noun is now ilkluster.
gem	imm	I own several kinds of imms.	From OE gim, which itself is a borrowing from Latin.
It seems that /j/ before /ɪ/ is regularly lost, which is why the modernized form is imm.
gender	kin	French has two kins: masculine and feminine.	From some OE and ME uses of kin (note that gender fundamentally means genus).
For old uses of gender meaning type, one can use kind.
As kin has other meanings, it may be best sometimes to use a compound for clarity such as wordkin (for grammatical gender).
gentle (as in not harsh)	soft	The teacher spoke with a soft tone to her students.
gentle (as in make or become gentle)	soften	I had to soften my tone.
gentle (as in of high social standing)	well-born	The commander comes from a well-born family.	For gentle in gentle birth, one can say good.
For gentleman (which originally meant man of gentle birth), one can use lording from ME lordinge (which had a variety of meanings, including man of high social rank).
For gentlewoman, one can use lordingwoman (a newly formed compound).
Ladies and gentlemen is thus ladies and lordings.
Genteel is a later French borrowing and is now couth (rhymes with booth).
gentry	lordinghood	Many of these estates were built by the landed lordinghood.
german (in familial words)	full	He is my full brother.	Example: cousin-german > full cousin.
For the older sense of closely related, one can use akin or kindred.
For the obsolete use as a noun meaning near relative, one can use near kinsman.
germane	kindred	Your question is not kindred to the discussion.
giant (noun)	eaten	I found myself in a cave that an eaten lived in.	From ME eten. A variant of ettin, originally a Scottish form.
Other words for giant from OE such as ent and ettin are generally used in fantasy to refer to specific kinds of giants.
giant (adjective)	eatenish	He managed to heave the eatenish table.
ginger	ingiver	He added a teaspoon of ingiver as part of the recipe.	From OE gingifer (ultimately a Latin borrowing). Pronounced as /ˈɪnd͡ʒɪvər/.
The modern form ginger is from French, given the initial /dʒ/. The Old English word probably had /j/ because g would have undergone palatalization because of the following i.
Ingiver is the regular phonetic descendant of the OE word; it is assumed that /j/ would have been lost since loss of /j/ before /ɪ/ seems regular.
glorify	wolder	He sang a song that woldered God.	From OE wuldrian.
glorious	wolderful	His was a wolderful victory.	From OE wuldorfull.
glory	wolder	He died for the glory of his land.	From OE wuldor. Also a verb with the same meaning as glory.
grand (adjective)	great	The actor has made his great entrance.
grand (in familial words)	great	My greatfather has been waiting for me.	Already found in words such as great-aunt and great-nephew.
grand (as in a thousand)	thousand	That guy earns about fifty thousand a year.	Or: thou (pronounced with /θ/ since it is a shortening of thousand).
Greek (adjective and language)	Greekish	He studied Latin and Old Greekish in his university years.	Now an archaic word.
This use of Greek appears to show influence from French grec or may even be a direct borrowing thereof. The French word is used for both the adjective and the language, and these uses are attested in Anglo-French grec.
Ancient Greek should then be Old Greekish (compare with German Altgriechisch).
grief	heef	She felt great heef after her husband died.	From OE hēof.
grieve	heeve	For a long time, I heeved my mother's death.	From OE hēofan.
grievous	heefsome	This heefsome deed cannot go unpunished.
guard	ward	The city wards are searching for criminals.	From ME ward. The verb is from ME warden.
One can also use wardman from ME wardman in case clarity is needed to distinguish it from ward meaning administrative division.
The use of guard meaning action of guarding is from the current word ward, e.g., keep guard > keep ward.
This replaces guard in compounds, e.g., lifeguard > lifeward (compare with OE līfweard), bodyguard > bodyward. Note that ward is pronounced differently from the suffix -ward in words such as backward and awkward, and the suffix is etymologically unrelated.
guardian	keeper	Are you the keepers of this boy?
guide (verb)	wise	Could you wise him to the front row?	Now a dialectal word from OE wīsian.
guide (noun)	wiser	This man will act as your wiser for the tour.
haste	hie	He ran in hie after the thief.	Now an obsolete word.
Hasten is a later formation and is now hie (now an archaic verb).
Hasty is a later formation and is now hieful (from ME hihful).
Posthaste is a later formation and can be replaced with something like hiefully or in great hie.
hearse	lichwain	He drove the lichwain for the funeral.	Calque of German Leichenwagen.
In its older meaning of framework placed over a coffin, one can use something like lichchest framework (see coffin).
heir	erver	The prince is the erver to the throne.	Based on OE irfa (see inherit).
Heiress is a later formation and is now erveren.
helmet	helm	Make sure to wear your helm before starting.	Now an archaic word.
herb	wort	Various worts are stored in the kitchen.	Rhymes with hurt.
The adjectival form, herbal, is a later borrowing from Latin and is now wortly.
herbage (as in herbs collectively)	worts	This country has beautiful worts.
herbage (as in succulent parts of herbs)	greens	He partook of the greens.
herbage (as in vegetation grazed by animals)	grazing worts	The cows began to eat some of the grazing worts.	Newly formed compound.
herbage (as in right to pasture)	leasowright	He was not granted leasowright.	Newly formed compound using leasow (see pasture).
heritage	erf	My grandfather left me this house as part of my erf.	From ME erf, with meaning taken from OE.
heron	rower	I saw a rower at the nearby lake.	From OE hrāgra. For the phonetic development that assumes that g was part of the first syllable and was thus [ɣ] (which would have later been vocalized later), compare with OE twēgra, the genitive of twēgen (> NE twain), and its ME form tweire, which shows that g in the OE form was not part of the second syllable, since it would not have been vocalized to i later.
historian	stearwriter	Some stearwriters have challenged this claim.	From OE stǣrwrītere.
history	stear	Those who do not learn from stear are doomed to repeat it.	From OE stǣr (possibly an originally Irish form of Latin historia).
Historical is a later Latin borrowing and is now stearly.
Historic, also a later Latin borrowing, is now stearish.
honest	truthful	There's no such thing as a truthful politician.
honesty	truthfulness	Truthfulness is the best policy.
honor, honour	ore	The knight showed ore in his conduct.	From ME ore. Also used as a verb with the same meaning as honor.
honorable, honourable	oreful	This is the only oreful course of action.
hospital (as in medical institution)	sickhouse	He had to be sent to a sickhouse.	Now a rare word.
hospital (as in institution for the needy)	needhouse	Many old men often went to the needhouse for help.	Newly formed compound.
hospitality	guestfriendliness	A good host knows how to show guestfriendliness.	Calque of German Gastfreundlichkeit.
Or: yestfriendliness (as guest is from Norse).
Hospitable is a later French borrowing and is now yestfriendly (or guestfriendly).
hostel	harborhouse / harbourhouse	We spent the night at a harborhouse.	Newly formed compound using harbor in its old meaning of lodging, since harbor now often refers to a port.
hostelry	harborhousing / harbourhousing	The finest harborhousing was a nearby inn.
hour	stound	There are twenty-four stounds in a day.	Now a dialectal word that originally meant period of time, while. Extended here to refer to hour for timekeeping.
human (noun)	mennish	Thankfully, the disease does not affect mennishes.	Extension of ME mennish (an adjective meaning human) to be a noun. Based on how the other West Germanic languages use their cognates to mean human.
One can even shorten this word and turn this to mensh (following Dutch mens and German Mensch).
In some cases, man works as well, e.g., all men are created equal.
human (adjective)	mennishly	There is an astounding amount of variety in mennishly societies.	From OE mennisclíc. It seems that other Germanic languages base the adjective on their word for human + their cognate of -ly.
humane	mennishly	It is not mennishly to treat the animals like that.	Extended here to mean humanistic, e.g., humane education > mennishly education.
humanity	mennishhood	The war brought out the best and the worst of mennishhood.	Newly formed derivative.
For the sense of quality of being human/humane, one can also use mennishliness.
For the sense of human beings collectively, mankind also works.
hurt	scathe	You scathe me with your words.	Now an archaic word still found in unscathed and scathing.
Or: shathe, from ME shathe (noun) and OE sceþþan and sceaþian (verb), since scathe is from Norse.
In some cases, harm may also work.
Note that the adjective is simply the past participle and thus is now shathed.
ignoble	unathel	He did so for unathel purposes.	See noble.
imagination	forestelling	Children have such wild forestellings.	See imagine.
imaginative	forestellsome	He is a forestellsome writer.	See imagine.
imagine (as in form a mental image)	forestell oneself	Forestell yourself what it is like to be in my shoes.	Calque of German vorstellen using dialectal stell (from OE stellan). Used reflexively.
imagine (as in suppose)	believe	Everyone believed that he had gone home already.	There are other ways to say this, e.g., reckon, ween.
impatience	unthild	One of his flaws is unthild.	From ME unithild. Rhymes with wild.
impatient	unthildy	The delays have caused me to become unthildy.	From OE ungeþyldig.
imperial	coaserly	Coaserly soldiers have invaded the town.	See emperor.
impossibility	unmightlihood	What you are suggesting is an unmightlihood.	See impossible. Newly formed derivative based on likelihood.
impossible	unmightly	It is unmightly to finish this task.	From OE unmihtlic.
impoverish	forarm	His policies only served to forarm people.	Newly formed derivative of arm (see poor) using for- in its obsolete use to form verbs from adjectives.
Impoverishment is a later French borrowing and is now forarming.
Obsolete form of impoverish: impover.
imprison	quartern	He was quarterned for a year.	From OE cweartern (extended here to be a verb).
imprisonment	quarterning	I was sentenced to two years' quarterning.
infamy	unlise	This is a day that will go down in unlise.	From OE unhlīsa. Rhymes with wise.
Infamous is a later Latin borrowing and is thus unliseful (from OE unhlīsful).
Obsolete form of infamy: infame.
influence	inflow	There is a great deal of French inflow in our vocabulary.	Essentially a calque of the Latin word.
Or: inflood (compare with Dutch invloed).
influx	inflow	The country has recently seen an inflow of tourists.
inherit	erve	I erved a great fortune from my father.	From OE irfan.
Obsolete variant of inherit: herit.
inheritance	erving	He received a comfortable erving.	Or: erf (see heritage).
Obsolete variant of inheritance: heritance.
inhuman, inhumane	unmennishly	The prisoners were held in unmennishly conditions.	See human.
inhumanity	unmennishliness	It was shocking to learn the unmennishliness of his crimes.	See humanity.
inquest	inseeking	There was an inseeking into his death.	Calque of inquest. See quest.
Or: inseeching (as seek shows Norse influence).
ire	wrath	You do not want to incur his wrath.	Or: anger (which is from Norse).
isle	island	I have never been to those islands before.
ivory	elpsbone	This figurine is made of elpsbone.	From ME elpes bon. Extended here to refer to the color.
The adjectival form is elpsbony.

jail, gaol	haft	He has been sent to haft.	From OE hæft (imprisonment, captivity).
Also used as a verb meaning jail, confine (from OE hæftan).
jailer, gaoler	haftward	The haftward brought me some food.	From haft + ward (see guard).
jaundice	yellowadle	He suffered from a severe case of yellowadle.	From ME yelwe adle (in which adle means disease).
javelin	atgore	The warrior threw an atgore at his opponent.	From OE ætgār.
jaw	chavel	He struck the man in the chavel.	From ME chavel. Rhymes with navel.
jest (as in joke)	laughter	The clown said many bad laughters.	From an old use of laughter. Also used for the meaning of laughing matter, object of ridicule.
jest (as in fun)	game	All that he said was in game.	From an old use of game.
jest (verb)	make a laughter	He made a laughter about the situation.	For jester (as in joker), one can use laughtermaker (an attested compound).
For jester (as in court buffoon), one can use merryman.
One can also use game in its old meaning of play, jest, e.g., surely you jest > surely you game.
Jew	Yowd	Many Yowds live in Europe.	From OE Iūdēas and Iūdan (both of which are plural forms). Rhymes with loud.
Judaism is a Latin borrowing and is now Yowddom (compare with Christendom and words in other Germanic languages such as Dutch jodendom).
Jewish is a later formation and is now Yowdish.
jewel	athelstone	This case holds several athelstones.	Calque of German Edelstein.
jeweler, jeweller	athelstonewright	Her father worked as an athelstonewright.	Newly formed compound using the archaic word wright.
jewellery, jewelry	athelstones	Someone has stolen my athelstones.
Jewry	Yowdish folk	We talked about the history of American Yowdish folk.
jolly (adjective)	merry	The host was a very merry man.
jolly (adverb)	pretty	Why, that's a pretty good idea!
journal (as in diary)	daybook	I have recorded the events in my daybook.	Extended here to be a verb.
journal (as in magazine)	timewrit	This is discussed in many academic timewrits.	Calque of German Zeitschrift.
journey	wayfare	I encountered many peculiar things in my last wayfare.	One can also use fare by itself if the context is clear.
For journeyman, one can use daysworkman, a newly formed compound, as journeyman uses journey in its obsolete meaning of a day's work.
joust	tilt	The two knights agreed to fight in a tilt.	From an old meaning of tilt, which is from OE *tyltan.
jovial	merry	He seems to be in a merry mood.
joviality	merriness	He greeted us with much merriness.
joy	selth	He found much selth in his wealth.	From ME selth.
For the verb, see rejoice.
joyous	selthful	This is a selthful occasion.
judge (verb)	deem	Deem not, lest ye be deemed.
judge (noun)	deemer	I shall be the deemer of that.
judgement, judgment	doom	According to the king's doom, the prisoner shall be set free.	From the word's original meaning.
Deeming can also work, e.g., the court's judgment > the court's doom/deeming.
kerchief	headcloth	I wore a headcloth for protection.	Handkerchief is now handcloth.
Neckerchief is now neckcloth.
kitten	cattock	I fed the cattock some fish.	From cat + -ock (diminutive suffix found in hillock).
Or: catling (as diminutive -ling is from Norse).
labor, labour	arveth	This work involves much arveth.	From OE earfoþe (which also had the more general meaning of hardship). Extended here to be a verb.
lake	mere	We rowed a boat in the mere.	Now an archaic word.
Lake is sometimes traced back to OE lacu, but the native word meant stream, channel (which is kept in the dialectal word lake), and the modern word is from Old French lac or Latin lacus.
language	speech	The author uses speech in many creative ways.	We can also use tongue in some contexts, e.g., I know nothing about the French speech/tongue.
languish	pine	The man pined in prison for several years.	Also pine away.
lay (as in poem)	leeth	The minstrel entertained the crowd with a romantic leeth.	From ME leth.
legal (as in pertaining to the law)	ealy	I have some ealy business to deal with.	Based on Middle English e (the native word for law).
Or: lawly (as law is a Norse borrowing).
legal (as in permitted by law)	eaful	The bill does not make this eaful.	Or: lawful (as law is a Norse borrowing).
Illegal is a later French or Latin borrowing and is now uneaful (or unlawful).
lesson (as in what is taught)	lore	Today's lore is about multiplication.	From an old use of lore.
For its archaic use as a verb meaning instruct, teach or lear (now a dialectal verb) can be used.
For its archaic use as a verb meaning admonish, chide can be used.
lesson (as in passage read aloud)	reading	The churchman read the first reading during the service.
letter (as in character)	bookstaff	What is the first bookstaff of the alphabet?	Now an archaic word. Plural: bookstaves.
If the context is clear, staff by itself can be used.
We can also extend this to mean literature in the plural, e.g., the world of letters > the world of bookstaves (as letters is essentially another way to refer to the written word).
Lettered in the meaning of educated is now well-read or learned (as in learned man).
letter (as in written message)	errandwrit	They wrote each other several love errandwrits.	From OE ǣrendgewrit. In this word, errand has its old meaning of message.
letter (as in mark with a letter)	bestaff	Each shape in the picture is bestaffed.	Newly formed derivative.
lion	lee	The lee let out a great roar.	From OE lēo (a Latin borrowing).
lioness	leen	The hiker said that he had seen a leen.	See -ess.
lineage	strind	He comes from an ancient strind.	Now an obsolete word. Rhymes with find.
loin	lend	He wrapped a cloth around his lends.	Now an obsolete word.
loyal	true-hearted	The business has rewarded its most true-hearted customers.	One can also use true if the context is clear, e.g., true to his master.
Obsolete form of loyal: leal.
loyalty	true-heartedness	He has shown nothing but true-heartedness to his master.	Obsolete form of loyalty: lewty.
madam (title)	lady	She became Lady President of the council.
madam (as in mistress of a household)	houselady	The houselady and I went out shopping yesterday.
madam (as in mistress of a brothel)	brothellady	She is the brothellady of this place.	From brothel + lady.
madam, ma'am (form of address)	lady	How can I help you, lady?	My lady may be used in more formal contexts such as addressing certain nobles.
magic	golder	I wish to unlock the secrets of golder.	From ME galder (a West Midlands form descending from OE galdor, gealdor). For the phonetic development, compare with old (< OE eald).
The adjectival form, magical, is from Latin and is translated here as golderly.
Extended here to be a verb meaning make or move by magic.
magician	golderer	The golderer amazed us with his might.
majesty	thrum	The thrum of the scenery was breathtaking.	From ME thrum.
Note that majesty appears to have been borrowed by other Germanic languages except Icelandic. Without French influence, English would have borrowed the word as mayestat (/ˈmæ.jəs.tət/).
The adjectival form, majestic, is a later formation and can be translated as thrumful (from OE þrymfull) or mayestatish (if one is willing to use mayestat).
mansion	lordhouse	The businesswoman owned several lordhouses.	Calque of German Herrenhaus, as a mansion was originally a lord's chief residence.
march (as in border area)	mark	The lord was given the mark to protect.	From an obsolete use of mark to mean boundary.
Extended here to be a verb meaning have a common border, e.g., England marks with Scotland.
For clarity, we can form a new compound and use markland (essentially borderland).
market	chapstow	I went to the chapstow to buy a few things.	From OE cēapstōw. Extended here to be a verb.
Market is a late OE borrowing and may not be of French origin, as it may have been borrowed from Latin or another Germanic language instead. Moreover, all the other Germanic languages have borrowed the word from Latin, so even without the Norman Conquest, English likely would have borrowed the word anyway.
marquess, marquis	markearl	The markearl has felt sick for the last few days.	Based on German Markgraf, in which Graf is the equivalent of count, earl. Mark in English is used here with the old meaning of march (border area).
The feminine, marchioness, is from Medieval Latin and is now markearlen (see -ess).
The derivative marquessate/marquisate is a later formation and is now markearldom.
marriage	wedlock	My friend and his wife have had a happy wedlock.
marry	wed	Will you wed me?	The archaic interjection marry is from the name Mary, which is from French.
mason	stonewright	These structures were built by stonewrights.	From OE stānwyrhta. Extended here to be a verb meaning build with masonry.
masonry	stonework	His stonework is to be admired.
mastery	mastership	The students managed to acquire a mastership of French.	Note that master is from OE mægester (a borrowing from Latin), which naturally became maister in Middle English and was later reinforced by the French word. The word shows simplification of ai to a before st, according to the OED. Other examples of this are ME frasten, a later form of fraisten (from Norse freista), ME trasten, a later form of ME traisten (from Norse treysta).
Master probably does not show influence from the Anglo-French form, as the main form in Anglo-French seems to have been mestre, and master a minor variant.
matrimonial	wedlockly	He is knowledgeable about wedlockly problems.	Newly formed derivative.
matrimony	wedlock	His dreams of wedlock have come true.
mayor	boroughreeve	The boroughreeve held a conference last week.	From OE burhgerēfa. Borough rhymes with furrow.
Mayoress is a later formation and is now boroughreeven (see -ess).
Mayoral is a later formation and is now boroughreevely.
Perhaps this word would have been reduced to something like boriff (compare with sheriff, which is etymologically shire-reeve), though there is no way of knowing for sure.
mean (average)	middleworth	Calculate the middleworth of these numbers.	Calque of German Mittelwert.
The adjectival form is now middleworthy, e.g., what is the mean temperature > what is the middleworthy temperature.
means (method)	middle	I will use all middles to accomplish my goals.	From an old use of middle.
By means of is now by the middle of (attested in Middle English).
Extended here to also mean resources, riches, e.g., a man of means > a man of middles.
mediocre	middling	The story is rather middling, to be honest.
melody	swinsing	His music has a nice swinsing to it.	From OE swinsung. Given the sound development of cleanse, it should probably be pronounced /ˈswɪnzɪŋ/.
Most other Germanic languages have borrowed melody as well.
merchandise (noun)	ware	The merchant displayed his ware in his shop.	Also can be used in the plural, e.g., he showed off his wares.
merchandise (verb)	chap	Here are some ways to chap your wares.	Now a dialectal word (originally a phonetic variant of the obsolete verb cheap).
merchant	chapman	I bought a few goods from the chapman.	Now an archaic word. The feminine is chapwoman.
For the compound merchantman, one can use lastship (from OE hlæstscip meaning cargo ship) or freightship (using freight, a loanword from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German).
minstrel	gleeman	The gleeman made us laugh with his performance.	Now a historical word.
minstrelsy	gleemancraft	His gleemancraft delighted us all.	Newly formed compound.
miracle	wonder	It is a wonder that the boy managed to survive the incident.	Miracle worker is thus wonder-worker (which is attested).
miraculous	wonderly	She had managed to make a wonderly recovery.	Now an obsolete word.
mirror (noun)	looking glass	Looking glass upon the wall, who's the fairest of them all?	Glass on its own may also work if the context is clear.
mirror (verb)	glass	The clear water glassed her face.	Extended here to figurative meanings of mirror such as his life mirrored hers.
mistress (feminine of master)	masteren	She is a masteren at archery.	See -ess.
For mistress in its old use as a title (modern Mrs.), one can use goodwife, e.g., Mrs. Smith > Goodwife Smith.
For Miss, one can use goody (simply a variant of goodwife, but extended here to also be used for unmarried women), e.g., Miss May > Goody May.
mistress (as in extramarital lover)	leman	The wife grew furious upon learning about her husband's leman.	Now an archaic word.
mix	minge	Minge the two colors together.	Now a dialectal word from OE mengan.
The modern word mix is almost certainly not from OE miscian (which would now be *misk because the OE word had /sk/); according to the OED, mix up to the 17th century was used mainly in the past participle, which aligns with a derivation from Anglo-French mixt.
monarch	onewielder	Onewielders must wield their might wisely.	Based on OE ānwealda.
The adjectival form is now onewielderly.
monarchy	onewielderdom	The British onewielderdom is the subject of much gossip.
money	fee	He spends his fee recklessly as if he were rich.	Now an obsolete word. Unrelated to fee meaning payment, as that word is from French.
mortgage	wedset	I took out a wedset to buy the house.	Now an obsolete word. Historically used in Scottish law to refer to mortgages. Wed here is used as a noun meaning pledge (see pawn).
mount (as in mountain)	barrow	Who first climbed Barrow Everest?	See mountain.
Mount is sometimes traced to OE munt, but the OE word would have become *munt (rhyming with hunt). The modern form mount is from the French pronunciation.
mountain	barrow	It took a long time to climb over the barrow.	From an old use of barrow (now an archaeological word meaning tumulus).
Or: berrow (from an obsolete ME variant that would have become the regular reflex of OE beorg).
multiplication	manifolding	This development encouraged the manifolding of factories.	Extended here to the mathematical use.
multiply	manifold	If only I could manifold my earnings with ease!	Also used intransitively. Extended here to the mathematical use.
murder	morther	He was charged for morther.	From ME morther (noun) and mortheren (verb).
Murder may have resulted from native sound changes (as the change /ð/ to /d/ occasionally occurred, e.g., OE geforþian > afford), or it may have come from influence of the French forms, which were found in Middle English, e.g., mordre, murdre. Morther (a form certain to be native) can be used instead if one feels that murder is foreign.
Murderous is a later formation and is now morthersome.
murderer	mortherer	I suspected that he was the mortherer.	From ME mortherer.
mustard	semp	He likes to eat hot dogs with semp.	From ME senep. For the phonetic development, compare with hemp (< OE henep).
mutton	sheepflesh	He ate his sheepflesh slowly.	Or: sheepmeat.
Can be shortened to: sheep.
mysterious	rinish	The hero soon encountered a rinish stranger.	Based on ME runish.
mystery	rine	I love solving murder rines.	From ME irine (< OE gerȳne).
nation	theed	He spoke with representatives from other theeds.	From ME thede.
National is a later French borrowing and is now theedly or theeder (in the sense of citizen).
Most other Germanic languages have borrowed nation as well.
natural	kindful	It is kindful to feel that way.	From ME kindeful, which is used since kindly now means warm-hearted.
Extended here to be a noun with the same meaning as natural.
nature	kind	It is not in my kind to harm a fellow human.	From the word's original meaning.
nephew	neave	I love my neave as much as I love my own son.	From ME neve.
niece	nift	My nift is such a darling girl.	From ME nifte.
noble	athel	The man talked with a few athel ladies.	From ME athel.
Found in the historical word atheling (pronounced with /ð/).
Ennoble is a later French borrowing and is now athelen.
nobility	athelness	Those of athelness must be of good education.
noun	nameword	The word baker is a nameword.	Calque of German Namenwort, with meaning narrowed to substantive in English.
number (as in quantity)	tale	2 is an even tale.	See count.
Number meaning numerical symbol (like in phone number or problem number 1) and act, musical piece seems to be a common Germanic borrowing.
number (grammar)	tale	German inflects verbs to show tale.	Attested in OE.
number (as in count, enumerate)	tell	All our options can be told on one hand.	See count.
number (as in amount to)	tell	All the signatures tell 1,000.	One can also use tell up to (now occasionally used).
number (as in include in a group)	reckon	He was reckoned among the best performers.	Extended here to be used intransitively, e.g., they reckon among my friends.
obedience	hearsomeness	The general demanded hearsomeness from his soldiers.	From ME hersumnesse.
obedient	hearsome	He is a good and hearsome servant.	From ME hersum.
obeisance	manship	We gave manship to the king.	From ME manship.
Extended here to have the concrete meaning of respectful gesture.
obeisant	manshipful	The servants made a manshipful gesture to their master.
obey	hearsome	Thou shalt hearsome thy superior.	From ME hersumen.
Obsolete form of obey: obeish.
ocean	sea	Various creatures live in the sea.	The adjectival form, oceanic, is a later Latin borrowing and is now seaish or sealy.
offer (as in propose)	bid	He once bid to help me.	From an old use of bid (as in bid at an auction).
Though OE had offrian, the word meant sacrifice and did not have its current general meaning, which it gained from French in Middle English.
Offer with the meaning of sacrifice is still acceptable, but the noun form should be offering.
offer (as in present)	bid	The builder bid his services to me.
oil	eal	This barrel is full of eal.	From ME ele. Ultimately a West Germanic borrowing of the Latin word.
olive (as in the fruit)	ealberry	He chopped the ealberries with a knife.	From OE eleberge. Extended here to be used for the color as well.
olive (as in the tree)	ealbeam	He thought about buying an ealbeam.	From ME elebem.
opine	ween	He weened that his country was better than mine.	Now an archaic word.
opinion	weening	In my weening, he is wasting his time.	Opinionated is a later formation and is now self-weening (now an obsolete word).
ordain (as in appoint)	hoad	He was hoaded a priest.	From ME hoden.
Old uses meaning arrange, put in order can be replaced with dight (see order).
ordain (as in decree)	will	This is simply what destiny has willed.	Conjugated as a regular verb.
order (as in arrangement, sequence)	dighting	What dighting should these numbers be in?	From dight, now a literary word. The meaning is extended from the meaning of arrange from ME dighten.
The verb is dight.
For in order to, one can use so as to, e.g., in order to learn > so as to learn.
For in order that, one can use so that, e.g., in order that we may learn > so that we may learn.
order (as in method)	dighting	There is no sense of dighting in his scheme.	Extension of meaning here.
order (as in obedience of the law)	dighting	What must be done to restore dighting?	Extension of meaning here.
order (as in condition)	dighting	All the ships are in good dighting, sir.	Extension of meaning here.
order (as in command)	bid	I am only doing what I am bidden, ma'am.	Past tense: bade, past participle: bidden.
The verb is also attested in the use of request, e.g., order dinner > bid dinner.
The noun is bidding, e.g., follow my order > follow my bidding.
order (as in rank, level, degree)	hoad	There are nine hoads of angels.	From ME hode. Also used for holy orders.
Extended here to the mathematical and taxonomical uses of order.
order (as in society, organization)	hoad	Many religious hoads have appeared these last few years.
orphan	stepbarn	The poor stepbarn lost his parents at an early age.	From ME stepbarn.
Differentiated here from stepchild, which formerly could mean orphan but now only means child of a previous marriage.
For the verb, one can use a phrase such as make a stepbarn, e.g., she was orphaned > she was made a stepbarn.
Orphanage is a later formation and is now stepbarnhouse.

pain	warch	I feel warch in my chest.	From ME warche. Rhymes with porch.
Extended here to be a verb with the same meaning as pain.
For pains in phrases such as go to pains, one can use swink (see toil).
paint	fay	I paid him to fay me a picture.	From ME feahen (< OE fǣgan).
Extended here to be a noun.
palace	highhall	The king and his family live in the highhall.	From OE hēahheall.
palm (as in hand's surface)	folm	Let me read your folm.	From OE folm.
paradise	nerxenwong	This place is my nerxenwong.	From OE neorxnawang. Alternatively modernized as narxenwong (showing the sound change of er to ar, which sometimes happened).
paramour	coppener	She met with her coppener in the garden at night.	From ME copenere.
parboil	halfseethe	I halfseethed the rice.	From half- + seethe (see boil).
pardon (verb)	forgive	The prisoner was forgiven for his crimes.	Or: foryeave, as give is from Norse. Past tense: foryave, past participle: foryeaven.
pardon (noun)	forgiveness	The governor granted him a forgiveness.	Or: foryeaveness (as give is a Norse borrowing).
Extended here to be a countable noun.
For the phrase (I beg your) pardon, one can say something like I ask for your forgiveness/foryeaveness.
parent	begetter	Good begetters pay attention to their children.	Or: beyetter (since get is from Norse).
For the verb meaning act as a parent to, one can use rear (or raise, a Norse borrowing), e.g., he was parented very well > he was reared very well. Parenting is then childrearing.
For parent in phrases such as parent company, one can use mother, e.g., mother company.
parish	priestshire	The priest was in charge of the priestshire.	From OE prēostscīr (attested only once).
Or: shriftshire (from OE scriftscīr, often translating Latin parochia in Wulfstan's works).
parson	priestshire head	The priestshire head spoke with the vicar.
parsonage	priestshire house	The priest stayed at the priestshire house.	Based on parish house.
For the older meaning of benefice of a parson, one can use something like priestshire headship.
part (as in portion)	deal	The cake was cut into seven deals.	The meaning of part is still found in phrases like a great deal of and deal out.
The adverb part and partly are translated here as deally.
Partake is now dealnim, based on OE dǣlnimende (taking part). Past tense: dealnam, past participle: dealnum.
Sometimes traced back to OE part (a borrowing from Latin), but the word was seldom used in OE and only as a technical word, so modern part is clearly from the French word.
For (a) part of, a deal of works.
part (as in component)	deal	Hand me those mechanical deals, will you?	Meaning extended here.
part (as in section)	deal	The book has three deals.	Meaning extended here.
part (as in role)	deal	His deal in the story is now over.	Meaning extended here.
part (as in region)	side	What brings you to this side, stranger?	Now a dialectal use of side.
part (as in side)	side	This is an error on my side.
part (as in parting in the hair)	shed	He had a shed in his hair.	From an obsolete use of shed. Also used for the verb, e.g., he sheds his hair.
part (as in divide)	deal	The country is dealt into several regions.	From an old use of deal.
part (as in separate)	sunder	A fool and his money are soon sundered.	Also used intransitively, e.g., now we must part > now we must sunder.
partial (as in incomplete)	dealwise	He paid off his debt through dealwise payments.	Newly formed derivative based on German teilweise. Also used for partially.
partial (as in biased)	uneven-handed	It is important that justice avoid being seen as uneven-handed.	Based on even-handed.
Impartial is thus even-handed.
partial (as in having a liking for)	keen	I am quite keen on eggs and bacon.	Used with the preposition on.
partiality (as in bias)	uneven-handedness	The judge must not show any uneven-handedness.	Impartiality is even-handedness.
partiality (as in liking)	keenness	We bonded over our keenness on cycling.
participle	dealnimmer	Fallen is the past dealnimmer of fall.	Based on OE dǣlnimend (which one can also modernize as dealnimmend).
pastor	shepherd	I went to church and spoke with the shepherd.	For clarity, one can also say church-shepherd (a newly formed compound).
Though pastoral can be found in OE as a borrowing, it was only used as a noun meaning a book on the care of souls. The current use of pastoral is from a later reborrowing from Latin, so pastoral can be translated as shepherdly (adjective) and shepherd-tale (a newly formed compound for the noun).
pasture	leasow	He took the animals out to the leasow.	Now a dialectal word. Pronounced as if spelled lezzow (compare with the phonetic development of meadow).
Pasturage is a later French borrowing and is now leasowland (for pastureland) and leasowing (for pasturing).
patience	thild	He has no thild with slackers.	From ME ithild. Rhymes with wild.
patient (adjective)	thildy	One needs to be thildy with the children.	From ME ithildi.
patient (as in someone receiving medical treatment)	sickling	The doctor is busy with a sickling right now.	Calque of Icelandic sjúklingur.
Most other Germanic languages have borrowed the word from French or Latin.
patient (as in recipient of an action)	underfanger	In "I struck the board", board is the underfanger of the action.	Based on ME underfongen (meaning receive).
pawn (chess)	bower	As part of his first move, he moved his bower.	From OE gebūr meaning farmer. Rhymes with tower. Extended here to mean pawn based on how most other Germanic languages use a word for farmer to refer to the pawn.
pawn (as in deposit an item as a pledge)	lay in wed	I was forced to lay my watch in wed.	Based on the ME phrase leien in wed.
pawn (as in pawned item)	wed	He gave him his coat as a wed.	From an old use of the word.
Pawnbroker is a later formation and is now wedlender (based on German Pfandleiher).
pawn (as in state of being pawned)	wed	My necklace is in wed.	From an old use of the word.
pay	yield	I'll yield you fifty dollars if you do me a favor.	From the word's original meaning. This can also be used for the noun.
Also used for figurative meanings of give, bestow, punish.
Pay (a nautical word meaning seal with pitch) is a different and later French borrowing and is translated here as smear, e.g., I will pay the deck with pitch > I will smear the deck with pitch.
payment	yielding	I have had to make monthly yieldings.
peace	frith	May frith be with you!	From ME frith.
peaceable (as in inclined toward peace)	frithloving	He is a very frithloving person.
peaceable (as in peaceful)	frithful	They lived in a frithful time.
pearl	mergrot	The chest was full of diamonds and mergrots.	From OE meregrot (apparently a reanalyzed form of Latin margarita).
The other Germanic languages (including Icelandic) have taken their word for pearl from the Latin or French word, so maybe pearl would have still become the general word even without the Norman Conquest.
Pearl meaning picot appears to be a variant of purl, which is of uncertain origin.
peasant	churl	The churls toiled away in the fields.	From an old use of the word.
Peasantry is a later formation and is now churlhood.
The adjectival form is churlish.
peer (as in equal)	evenling	You should spend more time with your evenlings.	From ME evenling.
peer (as in nobleman)	athelman	There are many different kinds of British athelmen.	From ME athelman. See noble.
The feminine, peeress, is a later formation and is now athelwoman.
Peerage is a later formation and is now athelmanhood.
people	folk	Thou truly art a man of the folk.	Used for people meaning human beings collectively, in which case the word may also be folks in colloquial speech, e.g., young people love it > young folk(s) love it.
Also used for people meaning body of persons, in which case the plural is folks, e.g., an African people > an African folk.
For people as the plural of person (individual), see person.
perish	forfare	Unfortunately, many forfared from the famine.	From ME forfaren.
perjure	forswear	The witness forswore himself in his testimony.
perjury	forswearing	You shall be punished later for forswearing.
person (as in individual)	leed	Who was the last leed to see her?	From ME lede. The plural is leeds, e.g., three people > three leeds.
Extended here to other uses of person such as character (like in a story) and grammatical person (based on the use of OE hād as a general word for person in several meanings).
Person is a common Germanic borrowing, but is generally used alongside the native word for human in other Germanic languages (see human).
Old English had mann as a common word for person, but that word later became man with the meaning of adult male human (such a shift also occurs in other Germanic languages), so English probably would have used another native word for person and would have perhaps borrowed person as a more formal word (especially for specific uses such as grammatical person). Note that if one is willing to borrow person, the plural should always be persons.
Personable appears to be a later formation and is now willsome (from ME wilsom).
person (as in body)	body	I assure you that I am hiding nothing on my body.	For in person, one can say in the flesh, e.g., I wish to meet you in the flesh.
personage	leedliness	Many leedlinesses attended the party.	From leedly (see personal) + -ness, calque of German Persönlichkeit.
If one is willing to borrow person, personliness also works.
personal (as in pertaining to a person)	leedly	He did so only for leedly gain.	Newly formed derivative.
If one is willing to borrow person, personly also works.
personal (as in on a person's body)	bodily	Please remove all your bodily effects.
personality	leedliness	This room needs more leedliness.	From leedly (see personal) + -ness, calque of German Persönlichkeit.
If one is willing to borrow person, personliness also works.
phantom	dwimmer	He was haunted by dwimmers at night.	From OE gedwimor.
philosopher	outhwit	Socrates and Plato are among the most influential Western outhwits.	From OE ūþwita.
Most other Germanic languages have borrowed the word from Latin.
Found in Old English in the form philosoph.
Obsolete form of philosopher: philosoph.
philosophy	outhwittting	He found outhwitting to be a very difficult subject.	Based on OE ūþwitegung.
Most other Germanic languages have borrowed the word from Latin.
Philosophical is a later formation and is now outwitly (from OE ūþwitlīc).
physician	leech	He thought to see the leech about his headache.	Now an archaic word.
piece	stitch	The cake has been cut into several stitches.	From ME stiche. Unrelated to stitch meaning sewn piece of thread.
Extended here to figurative uses of piece such as musical piece (compare with German Stück).
Extended here to be a verb, e.g., I pieced together the fragments > I stitched together the fragments.
Piecemeal is a later formation and is now stitchmeal (from OE styċċemǣlum).
piss	lant	Ugh, I've got some lant on my shoes.	Now a dialectal word with a few specialized uses. Extended here to be a verb meaning urinate.
Interestingly, all the other Germanic languages have borrowed piss from French.
place (as in location)	stead	There are many steads to visit in this city.	Still found in words like homestead and the phrase in one's stead.
One can also use stow (from ME stowe).
Sometimes traced back to OE plæce/plæts (a borrowing from Latin), but it was seldom used in OE, meant something like open space, public square, and would have become something like plats, so modern place is clearly from the French word.
place (as in set)	set	Could you set the box on the table?	One can also use dialectal stell (from OE stellan).
In some contexts, put (which probably existed in Old English and is implied by OE putung) works as well.
planet	wanderstar	Earth is the third wanderstar from the sun.	Now a rare compound calqued from German Wandelstern. Compare also with Icelandic reikistjarna (wander-star). All these are ultimately traced to Greek planētēs, which means wanderer and is also used to refer to planets because planets were thought to be in motion, unlike the fixed stars.
Planet is a common Germanic borrowing (though Icelandic seems to prefer using reikistjarna).
One can also use tungle (from ME tungol meaning star).
Planetary is a later borrowing from Latin and is now wanderstarly.
plant (vegetation)	wort	He liked to grow worts in his garden.	From an old use of the word (see herb). Rhymes with hurt.
Though plant was present in OE as plante (a Latin borrowing), it had the meaning of young plant. However, it was also present as the verb plantian meaning plant. The Latin word was not commonly used, but it later became the general word probably because the word was strengthened by or reborrowed from the French or Latin word.
Plant is also a common Germanic borrowing and is the general word used in those languages, though Icelandic apparently still uses the native words jurt (noun) and gróðursetja (verb) alongside planta. In any case, one can argue that even without the Norman Conquest, plant would have become the general word anyway.
plant (verb)	wortwale	I wortwaled some seeds in the soil.	From OE wyrtwalian. This can be extended to other noun uses of plant such as factory plant since they essentially refer to something planted.
See above for an explanation on the history of English plant.
pleasant	queem	The woman next door is quite queem.	Now an obsolete word.
please (polite adverb)	kindly	Kindly pass me the salt.
please (verb)	queem	The children are easy to queem with treats.	Now an obsolete word.
pleasure (noun)	queemness	I traveled to Europe for queemness.	From ME quemnesse.
pleasure (as in give pleasure to)	give queemness	I have many ways to give my lover queemness.	Or: yeave (as give is from Norse). Past tense of yeave: yave, past participle: yeaven.
pleasure (as in find pleasure in)	find queemness	I found queemness in sailing.
pledge (as in promise)	plight	I plight allegiance to the flag of the United States of America.	Now an archaic word. Unrelated to plight meaning unfortunate situation.
pledge (as in pawn, deposit)	wed	He gave the creditor his ring as a wed.	See pawn.
plight	hardship	The crisis only worsened our economic hardship.	For older uses of plight with its neutral meaning of state, condition and in negative phrases such as sorry plight and sad plight, one can use hoad from ME hode.
plumage	featherhame	The peacock has a beautiful featherhame.	Now an obsolete word.
poem	leeth	Let me express my gratitude with a leeth.	From ME leth.
Poem is also considered a Latin loanword.
poet	leether	Leethers will write about your heroic deeds.
poetic	leethish	The language used in this work is leethish.	Poetical is a variant formed with -al.
Or: leethly.
poetry	leethcraft	He likes to read Greek leethcraft.	From OE lēoþcræft.
poison	atter	The lord was murdered with a deadly atter.	From ME atter. Also used as a verb with the same meaning as poison.
Poisonous is a later formation and is now attery.
poor	arm	The arm men live in that part of the city.	From ME arm.
pork	swineflesh	He began to eat more swineflesh.	Or: swinemeat. Extended here to its figurative use in politics.
Can be shortened to: swine.
possibility	mightlihood	There is the mightlihood that he is mistaken.	See possible. Newly formed derivative based on likelihood.
possible	mightly	It is mightly to find the answer.	From OE mihtlic.
potion	drench	The apothecary gave me this drench.
poverty	armth	The disgraced man now lived in armth.	From ME armthe (see poor).
power (noun)	might	No man can resist my might.	Extended here to other meanings of power, e.g., three to the fifth power > three to the fifth might.
Empower is a later formation and is now mighten (from might + -en).
Powerful and powerless are now mighty and mightless.
power (as in supply with power)	mighten	This room is mightened by electricity.	Newly formed derivative.
One can also use feed in its figurative meaning of provide.
For the noun power-up, one can use mightener.
power (as in move with great force)	speed	I sped through the crowd without thinking.	Also used for the meaning of hit with great force, e.g., he sped the ball into the net.
praise	loave	The teacher loaved the student for his diligence.	Now an obsolete word.
pray (as in say a prayer)	bead	I beaded to God that I might recover soon.	From OE gebedian. Essentially an extension of bead in the old sense of prayer.
Or: bid (which had the old meaning of pray, but now means offer and command).
pray (as in implore)	beseech	I beseech you to tell me now.	Past tense and past participle are besought.
The archaic use of pray for please (adverb) can be replaced with something like I beseech you, e.g., I beseech you, continue.
prayer	bead	I knelt down in bead.	From an old use of bead.
preposition	foresetting	In and on are both foresettings.	Based on OE fōresetnes, with substitution of the suffix.
preside	foresit	I will foresit at today's meeting.	From OE fōresittan.
president	foresitter	Who is the current foresitter of the republic?	Based on Icelandic forseti.
Presidential is a later formation and is now foresitterly.
For presidency, see presidence.
prince (as in male ruler)	older	The older had many advisors to help him rule the realm.	From OE ealdor (this is the expected modern form, compare with how OE eald became modern old). Old English had a number of words to translate Latin princeps.
Historically, prince was used to mean leader, monarch. It later became a title used for rulers of small states or principalities.
Prince is a common Germanic borrowing, but it seems that in the other Germanic languages, it is used for male members of a monarch's family; to refer to a sovereign prince, Dutch and German use a nominalized form of their cognate of first, and the North Germanic languages have borrowed the German word for it.
prince (as in male member of a monarch's family)	atheling	He is connected to a British atheling.	Now a historical word. Pronounced with /ð/; the pronunciation with /θ/ is a spelling pronunciation.
Originally, atheling denoted someone of nobility, but it seems that it gradually came to refer to members of a royal family.
The use of prince to refer to a male heir is an English development that began with the bestowing of the title of Prince of Wales to the king's eldest surviving son, and prince was later used for other male heirs.
princess (as in female ruler)	olderen	The olderen is much adored by the people.	See -ess.
Princess is a common Germanic borrowing, though it seems that other Germanic languages use it to refer to a female member of a monarch's family.
princess (as in female member of a monarch's family)	athelingen	The athelingen has many servants to tend to her.	See -ess.
principality	olderdom	Liechtenstein is an olderdom.	Based on OE ealdordōm.
If one is willing to borrow prince, one can use princedom.
prison	quartern	The criminal managed to escape from quartern.	From OE cweartern.
Prison is a late OE borrowing from French.
For its use as a verb, see imprison.
prisoner	quarterner	The quarterners complained about their treatment.
proffer	bid	The man bid me his card.	See offer.
progeny	offspring	My legacy shall live on through my offspring.
prolong	lengthen	He intends to lengthen his leadership.
promise (as in vow)	behote	I do not make behotes that I cannot keep.	From ME bihot.
promise (as in indicate)	behote	This behotes to be an interesting event.	Meaning extended here (compare with German versprechen).
Promising is thus behoting.
promise (as in indication of excellence)	behote	That young man shows a lot of behote.	Meaning extended here.
pronoun	fornameword	I and thou are both fornamewords.	Calque of Dutch voornaamwoord and based on German Fürwort and OE forenama.
pronounce	outspeak	How do you outspeak this word?	Calque of German aussprechen. Also used to mean declare.
In the sense of articulate (a word), say works as well.
pronunciation	outspeech	His outspeech of the word betrays his British origins.
prophecy	witying	According to the witying, a hero will arrive to save us.	From ME witiinge.
prophesy	wity	The soothsayer witied that the king should meet his death tomorrow.	From ME witien.
prophet	wity	The magician claimed to be a wity.	From ME witie.
prophetess	witien	He heard a grim message from the witien.	See -ess.
prose	spell	He wrote this tale in spell as opposed to verse.	From an old use of spell (as in magical incantation).
Also used here as a verb meaning talk, converse.
Prosaic is a later French borrowing and is now spellish.
pullet	hennock	He bought six hennocks.	From hen + -ock (diminutive suffix found in hillock).
Or: henling (as diminutive -ling is from Norse).
punish	witten	I must witten you for your insolence.	From OE wītnian. Related to the dialectal word wite (which formerly meant punishment and now means blame).
It is assumed that the vowel would have been shortened later by the following consonant cluster.
punishment	wittening	I took away his toys as wittening for his bad behavior.
pure	shire	What you see here is shire gold.	Now an obsolete word.
One can also use sheer, which probably shows Norse influence.
Clean may work as well.
Impure appears to be a Latin borrowing and is now unshire.
purify	shire	This machine is used to shire water.	From ME shiren.
Cleanse works as well.
purity	shireness	I am worried about the shireness of our water.	From ME shirnes.
Cleanness may work as well.
Impurity appears to be a Latin borrowing and is now unshireness.
quaint (as in charmingly old-fashioned)	oldmoody	Just the other day, I stumbled upon this oldmoody store.	Newly formed compound.
quaint (as in charmingly unusual)	wondersome	What a wondersome idea you have!	Now a rare word meaning wondrous.
quest	seeking	He has worked tirelessly in the seeking of the solution.	Or: seeching (as seek shows Norse influence).
The verb is also seek/seech (see search). Past tense and past participle of seech is still sought.
question (as in interrogative)	fraining	Could I ask you a fraining?	From the dialectal verb frain meaning inquire.
question (as in interrogate)	frain	The men were frained about their role in the event.	Ask also works in this case.
question (as in doubt)	tween	Thy loyalty is beyond tween.	See doubt.
quiet (noun)	row	For once, I would like to have some peace and row.	From ME rowe (< OE rōw). Rhymes with grow.
quiet (adjective)	row	Everyone had to be row while moving.	From OE rōw.
Or: rowy, based on German ruhig.
Extended here to be a verb of the same meaning.
quietude	rowness	The neighborhood's rowness was suddenly broken one afternoon.
quiver (as in portable case)	cocker	The archer took an arrow out of the cocker.	Now an obsolete word.
real	sooth	There are many things in sooth life that sound as if they had come from fiction.	Now an archaic word.
The adverbial form really is now soothly.
For the phrase for real, one can use the archaic interjection forsooth.
In certain cases, true and truth may also be used for real and reality, respectively.
reality	sooth	You must wake up and see sooth for yourself.
realm	rich	Many men throughout the rich heeded the warning.	From ME riche, ultimately the same word as the adjective rich.
reason (as in cause, justification)	ground	What was her ground for going to that place?
reason (as in rational thinking)	inwit	All men are capable of inwit.	From ME inwit (using wit in its old meaning of reason, intellect).
Extended here to be a verb of the same meaning.
recount (as in tell)	tell	I told my adventures in South America.
regal	kingly	I had to fulfill my kingly duties.
regret	rue	I rue not having told her everything.	Regretful is now rueful.
reign (noun)	rixling	What happened during Queen Elizabeth's rixling?	From ME rixlinge.
reign (verb)	rixle	The monarch rixles, but does not rule.	From ME rixlen.
rejoice	selthen	I selthened to see her again.	From selth (see joy) + -en.
remember (as in recall)	mun	Do you mun the password to your computer?	From ME imunen.
remember (as in send greetings)	send one's greetings	Please send my greetings to your mother.
remembrance	munning	The munning of that day suddenly came back to me.
rent	gavel	He was told that he had to pay his gavel tomorrow.	From ME gavel. Now a historical word.
revenge	wrake	The spiteful warlock plotted his wrake.	Now an obsolete word. Also used as a verb with the same meaning as revenge (from ME wraken).
reward	meed	You deserve a meed for your heroism.	Now an archaic word. Also used as a verb.
riches	richdom	The woman went from rags to richdom.	From ME richedom.
river	ea	There were many boats out on the ea.	Now a dialectal word.
Stream is often used interchangeably with river, though the latter often denotes a larger stream of water.
rob	reave	A group of criminals reft the bank.	Now an archaic word. Past tense and past participle are reft.
robber	reaver	The reaver quickly fled the scene with the stolen goods.
robbery	reaf	The seven men have been arrested for reaf.	Now an obsolete word generally spelled as reif in Scottish use. Respelled here to match with reave.
Note that the plural form is reaves (like how leaves is the plural of leaf).
rock (stone)	stone	She threw a stone at the target.	Attested in OE as rocc (only in the compound stānrocc), but the base word appears to have been borrowed from French.
rock (large mass)	hall	The ship sank after it struck a hall.	From OE heall. Unrelated to hall meaning room.
For clarity, we can make a compound and say hallstone (compare with OE healstān, which seems to have referred to a kind of cake).
Roman (noun)	Roomer	The Roomers had built an impressive civilization.	Based on German Römer and OE Romware (Romans).
Roman (adjective)	Roomish	Augustus was the first Roomish emperor.	Based on Romish, originally used in the sense of Roman (compare with OE Rēmisc, which shows umlaut, and German römisch).
In Old and Middle English, Romanish was used.
Rome	Room	He went to Room for vacation last year.	From an archaic pronunciation directly traced to OE Rōm.
The modern form Rome appears to show influence from the French or Latin form.
rook (chess)	tor	He decided to move his tor.	From OE torr meaning tower. Extended here to refer to the chess piece, based on how most other Germanic languages use their word for tower to refer to the rook, though their word for tower (like OE torr) ultimately comes from Latin turris. Interestingly enough, Icelandic instead uses hrókur, which is ultimately from French.
rose (flower)	roose	I gave my darling a few rooses.	From OE rōse. Rhymes with choose.
The current vowel in rose is probably from the French form.
round (adjective)	sinwalt	Both the coin and the ball are sinwalt.	From OE sinewealt. Extended here to be a verb meaning make round and a noun meaning round piece.
For the adverb and the preposition around, the word is emb from ME embe (originally an unstressed variant of OE ymbe and preserved in the phrase ember days). The variant umb (from ME umbe) is from Norse.
round (as in route, circuit)	embgang	The physician went to the hospital and began his embgang.	From OE ymbgang.
Extended here to other meanings of round involving figurative motion such as a round of drinks, a tournament round, and round of chores.
Also used as a verb meaning go around.
round (as in ammunition)	shell	This gun can shoot thirty shells a second.
royal	kingly	Two members of the kingly family have gone to Germany.	For the informal use of royal as a noun, kingly can work as well, e.g., one of the kinglies.
Obsolete form of royal: real (unrelated to real meaning existing, genuine).
royalty (as in kingly status)	kingliness	This room is decorated to show off his kingliness.	Extended here to also be used for one of royalty, e.g., this house belongs to royalty > this house belongs to kingliness.
royalty (as in the legal concept)	kingright	I shall be compensated through kingrights.	Royalty in this context originally referred to a royal right.
rule (as in regulation)	rail	These are the rails of the game.	From ME reʒhel (< OE regol, ultimately a Latin borrowing). The OE form had /eɣ/, which would have later changed to Middle English /ɛi/ and eventually modern /eɪ/.
Ruler meaning measuring stick is a later formation and is now railstick (from ME regolsticca).
Also used as a verb meaning mark with lines with a ruler (from OE regolian).
rule (as in custom)	rail	This is the exception that proves the rail.
rule (as in authority)	wield	The territory was no longer under British wield.	From ME weld.
One can also use wold from ME wolde.
rule (as in govern)	wield	The queen wields this land.	From an old use of wield.
One can also use wold from ME wolden (< OE wealdan).
rule (as in decide judicially)	deem	The judge deemed that the law was unconstitutional.	For the noun ruling, one can also use doom besides deeming (see judgment).
sacrifice (verb)	offer	The Romans offered certain animals to the gods.	Note that offer is attested in OE only in this meaning (see offer).
sacrifice (noun)	offering	Making an offering is a common way to show respect to the gods.	Note that the noun offer is from French (see offer).
sage (as in wise man)	wiseman	I visited a wiseman for advice.	From the phrase wise man. The feminine is wisewoman.
sage (as in wise)	wise	He gave me some wise advice.
sage (as in the herb)	salvy	Salvy is used in many dishes.	From ME salvie (< OE salfige), ultimately a Germanic borrowing from Latin.
saint	hallow	This place was named after a hallow.	Now an archaic word. The verb hallow is extended here to also mean formally recognize as a saint.
Sometimes traced back to OE sanct, but the pronunciation of saint can only be traced back to the Old French word.
salmon	lax	I caught some lax yesterday.	Now an obsolete word.
sanctification	hallowing	The hallowing of the wine was complete.	See sanctify.
sanctify	hallow	May God hallow your soul!	Now an archaic word.
scabbard	sheath	He took his sword out of his sheath.
science	witship	Thanks to witship, our understanding of the world has improved.	Calque of German Wissenschaft.
The adjectival form, scientific, is a later borrowing from French or Latin and is now witshiply.
Scientist is a later formation and is now witshipper.
search (as in look for)	seek	The police are now seeching the suspect.	Or: seech (as seek shows Norse influence). The past tense and past participle of seech is still sought.
The noun is seeching (or seeking), e.g., they began a seeching of the suspect.
Another word for this is look for, e.g., look for the suspect.
search (as in examine)	seech through	I'm sorry, but I must seech through your luggage.	Based on the archaic word throughseek (which one can also use).
Or: seek through.
Another word for this is look through, e.g., I must look through your luggage.
season (time)	yeartide	There are four yeartides in a year.	Calque of German Jahreszeit.
Seasonal is a later formation and is now yeartidely.
season (as in period of time)	tide	It's baseball tide this time of year.	From an old use of tide.
Extended here for the use in entertainment, e.g., the show ran for ten tides.
The adjectival form is tidely.
season (as in add flavoring)	wort	I worted the soup with some pepper.	From OE gewyrtian. Rhymes with hurt.
Seasoning is thus worting.
season (as in ripen)	ripen	He was a soldier ripened by experience.	We can also extend this to the meaning of prepare (wood).
second (ordinal)	tother	The tother book is better than the third.	From ME tother, a dialectal variant of other and still used in some dialects as a word for other.
Meaning narrowed here to second, which other formerly could mean.
Other can be used, but as it is now used more broadly, this may be confused with its main meanings.
Second meaning back, support is a later French borrowing and is translated here as back, e.g., I second the motion > I back the motion.
Second meaning transfer for temporary duty is also a later French borrowing and is translated here as lend, e.g., the officer was seconded to another post > the officer was lent to another post.
secret	dern	He kept the cave's existence dern.	Now a dialectal word. Its use as a noun meaning secret is last found in Middle English.
Secrecy is a later formation and is now dernship (from Middle English).
see (as in bishop's seat of authority)	bishopsettle	The city became a bishopsettle in the tenth century.	From OE bisceopsetl.
Based on the fact that see ultimately comes from Latin sēdēs (seat, chair) and gradually came to refer to a bishop's seat of authority.
Or: bishopseat (as seat is from Norse).
Holy See is now Holy Settle, based on formations such as German Heiliger Stuhl that are calques of Latin Sancta Sedes.
seneschal	steward	He was now the royal steward.
sense (as in perception)	anget	You certainly have a fine anget of humor.	From ME andȝit. Stressed on the first syllable.
Or: anyet (the native form), as the form get shows Norse influence, though no Norse-influenced form appears to be attested in Middle English, so this assumes that had the word survived, the root would have been replaced with the Norse word. The same process happened for forget (for which the native form is foryet), but not for beseech (etymologically a derivative of seek, which shows Norse influence).
sense (as in meaning)	anget	This word has many different angets.
sense (as in faculty)	anget	What are the five human angets?
sense (as in feeling)	anget	I want to create an anget of community here.	Feeling also works.
sense (as in intellect)	anget	You sound like you are out of your anget.	Wits also works.
sense (as in perceive)	aget	I aget tension in the air.	From ME ayiten. Stressed on the second syllable.
Or: ayet (as get is from Norse). Past tense: ayat, past participle: ayetten.
The only possible sign of a Norse-influenced form in Middle English appears in the Ormulum, in which anndgætenn is used (although Orm also uses anndȝætenn, which clearly represents the native form).
sensible	angetful	He proposed many angetful solutions.	From OE andgietfull.
Or: anyetful.
Senseless is a later formation and is now angetless/anyetless.
sensual	angetly	This meal is quite an angetly delight.	Based on OE andgietlic, with the meaning altered.
Or: anyetly.
serf	esen	Russia no longer has esens.	From OE esne. Pronounced as /ɛzən/.
The word in OE meant slave (which serf originally meant). Meaning narrowed here to the modern meaning of serf.
serpent	snake	The lair is full of snakes.
serpentine (adjective)	snakish	We wended our way through the snakish path.
servant	thainingman	The thane had many thainingmen.	From ME thening men (serving men). The feminine is thainingwoman or thainingmaid (based on maidservant).
Used here to separate it from thane, which originally meant servant, but gradually came to be used to refer to nobility.
serve (as in be in the service of)	thain	I live to thain my lord.	From ME theinen.
Extended here to mean treat, as in he has served me well.
Disserve is a later formation and is now misthain.
Server is now thainer.
serve (as in do service)	thain	He thained in the military seven years ago.	Extended here to be intransitive.
serve (as in function)	thain	This will thain as a suitable replacement.	Meaning extended here.
serve (as in present)	thain	Dinner is thained.
serve (as in be subject to a punishment)	undergo	You shall undergo twelve years in prison.
serve (as in (of a male animal) copulate)	match with	The stallion matched with the mare.	From the phrase match with, which uses match in its old meaning of mate.
Or: match mid (in which mid is an obsolete preposition meaning with), as the use of with as a replacement for mid was due to Norse influence.
serve (as in deliver)	send	I was sent a parking ticket for overstaying.
serve (sports)	send	Send the ball already!	The noun is sending.
service (as in act of serving)	thaining	We appreciate your thaining to the country.	The verb meaning perform a service for is thain (see serve).
Service is a late Old English borrowing from French and is attested once with the meaning of religious service.
Disservice is a later formation and is now misthaining.
service (as in utility)	thaining	There is no bus thaining here.	See serve.
service (as in operation)	thaining	The machine is currently not in thaining.	Meaning extended here.
service (as in ceremony)	thaining	I helped plan the funeral thaining.	Meaning extended here.
service (as in set of utensils)	dishware	The waitress brought out the tea dishware.
service (as in inspection)	upkeep	I took my car to the shop for upkeep.	Also used as a verb meaning perform repair work.
service (as in (of a male animal) copulate)	match with	The bull matched with those cows.	See serve.
service (as in delivery)	sending	There are fees for a sending of a writ.
service (sports)	sending	It's your sending now.
sir (title)	bern	Bern Lancelot was King Arthur's greatest knight.	From ME bern, a poetic word that mainly meant man, but had secondary meanings such as warrior and nobleman. Used as the feminine of ME birde (see dame). Used here as a knightly title.
sir (form of address)	lord	How can I help you, lord?	My lord may be used in more formal contexts such as addressing certain nobles.
sire (form of address)	my lord	My lord, what shall I do?
sire (as in an animal's father)	fatherdeer	This horse's fatherdeer is a champion.	Calque of German Vatertier, from father + deer (in its old meaning of animal).
Older uses referring to any father can be translated as father.
sire (as in beget)	father	The horse fathered two winners.
slave	thew	In ancient Rome, thews were the property of their owners.	From ME theu. Extended here to be a verb with the same meaning as slave.
Or: thrall (a Norse borrowing).
Slavery is a later formation and is now thewdom (or thralldom).
Enslave is also a later formation and is now bethew (or bethrall, based on enthrall).
Note that other Germanic languages but Icelandic have borrowed the word slave as well.
sorcerer	warlock	Many dared not to test the warlock's wrath.	Often with a negative connotation.
Obsolete form of sorcerer: sorcer.
For the feminine, see sorceress.
Sorcerous is a later formation and is now warlockly.
sorceress	warlocken	The warlocken lived in a house far from the village.	See -ess.
One can also use a separate word such as haitess from OE hægtesse, which may be the source of hag and is akin to German Hexe.
sorcery	warlockcraft	His warlockcraft amazed all the spectators.	Based on the obsolete word warlockry.
sound (what can be heard)	lide	A loud lide awakened him from his slumber.	From ME lude (< OE hlȳd). According to the OED, the ME form loude in a later manuscript of Layamon's Brut is probably a misinterpretation of the spelling lude in the original manuscript (as u could still be used for /y/ at the time).
Spain	Ispany	He went to Ispany for vacation last month.	From OE Ispania. Note that the stress is on the first syllable, so the word is pronounced /ˈɪspəni/.
Spanish is derived from this and is now Ispanish (/ˈɪspənɪʃ/).
Spaniard	Ispanishman	I heard about it from an Ispanishman.	Formed similarly to words such as Englishman and Frenchman.
The feminine is Ispanishwoman.
spell (as in spell a word)	bookstaff	Can you bookstaff this word aloud?	Based on German buchstabieren and Icelandic stava.
Spelling is thus bookstaffing.
spell (as in form a word)	make	What word do these three letters make?
spell (as in denote)	betoken	This betokens trouble.
spirit (as in inner being)	ghost	The human ghost is quite strong.	From an old use of ghost. Found in Holy Ghost.
Soul also works.
spirit (as in non-physical part of a being)	ghost	His ghost left his body after his death.	Soul also works.
spirit (as in supernatural being)	ghost	It is said that an evil ghost haunts that house.	Extended here to be a verb meaning carry off mysteriously like a ghost.
spirit (as in vigor, energy)	ghost	He sang the song with ghost.	From an old use of ghost.
Other words that may work for this are life and soul.
spirit (as in attitude)	ghost	The artwork simply reflects the ghost of the times.	Meaning extended here.
The German loanword Zeitgeist (spirit of the times) can thus be translated as tideghost (an etymological calque).
Sometimes, it may be better to use mood, e.g., he is in high spirits > he is in a lively mood.
spirit (as in intent)	ghost	I prefer to go with the ghost of the law.	Meaning extended here.
spirit (as in person)	ghost	He is a kind old ghost.	From an old use of ghost.
Soul also works.
spiritual	ghostly	The song gave him ghostly comfort.	From an old use of ghostly.
sport (amusement, enjoyment)	spill	He found much spill in playing around in the hay.	From ME spile (akin to German Spiel).
Game in its old meaning of amusement also works.
sport (physical activity)	spill	Football is a popular spill in many lands.	Meaning extended here.
sport (frolic)	spill	Children were spilling around in the pond.	From ME spilen.
Play and game (in its old meaning of play, jest) also work.
sport (display)	show off	He likes to show off the medal he won a year ago.
sprite	puck	A little puck flew by me.	From an old word referring to a mischievous fairy.
Some older uses of sprite may be better replaced with ghost or soul.
The use of sprite referring to an image is a modern English development based on how sprites float on top of an image like mythological sprites. This use of sprite has entered other languages. Because of its metaphorical origin, one can extend the meaning of puck for this.
spy (verb)	sight	I sight with my little eye something small.	Meaning extended here to the meaning of espionage.
spy (noun)	sighter	The police were looking for sighters.	Meaning extended here.
squire (as in attendant)	shieldknape	The knight was accompanied by his shieldknape.	Calque of Dutch schildknaap and German Schildknappe. Knape is an obsolete word meaning boy.
Extended here to be a verb meaning attend as a squire.
squire (as in landowner of the gentry)	goodlord	The goodlord frequently visited the village.	From an obsolete word referring to local nobility.
squirrel	oakwern	I saw an oakwern eating an acorn.	From ME ocquerne.
stomach (noun)	belly	My belly does not feel good now.
stomach (verb)	brook	I will not brook any more of your complaining.
story (as in tale)	tale	I have written many tales for children.	Story/storey meaning floor is from Anglo-Latin (ultimately from Latin historia) and can be simply replaced with floor.
strange (as in peculiar)	selcouth	We are dealing with a selcouth case of murder.	Now an obsolete word. The couth is the same couth as in uncouth.
One can also use other words such as weird, uncanny, or odd (a Norse borrowing) with various connotations.
strange (as in unfamiliar)	fremd	His accent was fremd to my ears.	Now a dialectal word.
stranger	fremdling	One night, a fremdling knocked on our door.	Newly formed derivative.
strife	cheast	The party was suffering from internal cheast.	From ME chest.
For the older sense of strong endeavor, one can use founding (see strive).
strive (as in endeavor)	found	I found for success every day.	From ME founden.
strive (as in contend)	kemp	We must kemp against corruption.	Now a dialectal word.
sulfur, sulphur	sweavel	Sweavel is used for making gunpowder.	From ME swefel.
Brimstone can also be used, but is now mainly found in biblical language.
surmount (as in overcome)	overcome	These mountains are dangerous, but can be overcome.
surmount (as in be on top of)	top	In the distance was a temple topped by a statue.
surrender	give up	The enemies were forced to give up.	Or: yeave, as give is from Norse. Past tense of yeave: yave, past participle: yeaven.
If the context is clear, yield also works.
The noun is upgiving (or upyeaving).
Swiss (noun)	Switzer	My new neighbor is a Switzer.	A borrowing from Middle High German or Middle Dutch.
The country is of course Switzerland.
Swiss (adjective)	Switzerish	He bought a Switzerish watch during his travels.

tally (as in tally stick)	talestick	I recorded the score with a talestick.	Newly formed compound preserving tale in its old meaning of number, total (see count).
tally (as in record, count)	telling	I have been keeping a telling of all the accidents so far.	See count.
tally (as in score, amount)	tale	What's the tale so far?	See count.
tally (as in count the number of)	tell	They began to tell the votes.	See count.
tally (as in correspond)	match	Why does his story not match hers?
targe	tarrow	The squire only had a tarrow and a wooden sword to fight with.	From OE targa, targe (possibly an early Norse borrowing). The modern word comes from French, as shown by the presence of /dʒ/ in the pronunciation.
taste (faculty)	smatch	His sickness caused him to lose his smatch.	Or: smack.
taste (as in quality)	smatch	This drink has an exquisite smatch.
taste (as in small quantity)	smatch	This musical piece has a smatch of jazz in it.
taste (as in good style)	smatch	You have excellent smatch in music.	Meaning extended here.
taste (as in liking)	smatch	I have a smatch for traveling.	Meaning extended here.
taste (as in sense by tasting)	smatch	Do you want to smatch my freshly baked cookies?
taste (as in have a taste of)	smatch	This smatches like cinnamon.
tavern	inn	I spent the night at a nearby inn.
tense (grammar)	tide	Sank is the past tide of sink.	From the word's original meaning, as tide referred to time, like in the saying time and tide wait for no man.
theologian	godloresman	Godloresmen are not the only ones who can read the Bible.	Based on godlore (see theology) + loresman (from ME loresman, which meant instructor).
theology	godlore	As one can tell, godlore is about God.	Newly formed compound.
Theological is a Latin borrowing and is now godlorely.
throne	highsettle	The king sat quietly on his highsettle.	A modern word based on OE hēahsetl (literally high seat).
Throne (borrowed from French and later re-formed through influence of its Greek forebear) is found in most other Germanic languages.
toil	swink	He swank in the fields all day.	Now an obsolete word.
Past tense: swank, past participle: swunk.
touch (as in make contact)	rine	Do not rine the stove while it is hot.	Now an obsolete word.
touch (as in move emotionally)	rine	His words rined her greatly.
touch (faculty)	rining	The blind man had to rely on his hearing and his rining.	From ME rinung.
touch (as in act of touching)	rining	A rining of the button is all that needs to be done.
touch (as in how something feels upon being touched)	rining	This cloth has a very smooth rining.
touch (as in way of doing something)	rining	I'm afraid that you've been losing your rining.	Meaning extended here.
touch (as in small amount)	rining	Just give it a rining of sugar.	Meaning extended here.
touch (as in trace)	rining	There was a rining of sarcasm in her voice.	Meaning extended here.
tower	tor	They thought to build a tor that reached up to the heavens.	From OE torr, a borrowing from Latin.
Tower is a late OE borrowing of the French form.
traitor	forreader	He is nothing but a filthy forreader!	See tray.
traitorous	forreaderly	He shall be punished for his forreaderly misdeeds.
travail	swink	After months of swink, he managed to succeed.	Now an obsolete word.
Past tense: swank, past participle: swunk.
travel	wayfare	I have wayfared to many different lands.	One can also use fare by itself if the context is clear.
Traveler is a later formation and is now wayfarer or farer (especially in compounds like seafarer).
treacherous	swikeful	The king disposed of his swikeful advisor.	From ME swikeful. Extended here to mean having a false appearance of safety.
treachery	swikedom	The guard's greed led him to swikedom.	From ME swikedom.
treason	forreading	The man was condemned for his forreading.	See tray. Used also for betrayal (a native formation).
Treasonable and treasonous are later formations and are now forreaderly.
treasure	mathom	We were looking for buried mathom.	From ME madmes (< OE māþm). Extended here to be a verb with the same meaning.
treasury	mathomhouse	He was appointed secretary of the mathomhouse.	From OE māðumhūs (treasure-house).
tribe	stem	Several stems live in this region.	From the meaning of stem meaning line of ancestry and from how most other Germanic languages' word for stem is also used for tribe.
For clarity, one can use folkstem (calque of German Volksstamm).
Tribal is a later formation and is now stemly (adjective) or stemsman as a noun meaning tribesman.
uncle	eam	Everyone, my eam has come to pay us a visit.	Now a dialectal word. Originally meant maternal uncle.
urine	myeth	He was told to fill the cup with his myeth.	From OE migoþa. Pronounced /maɪθ/.
Urinate is a later Latin borrowing and is now mye (from ME mīȝen).
vacation (as in period of leisure)	holiday	We went to Italy for summer holiday.	From the British use of the word.
vacation (as in act of vacating)	withdrawing	His financial troubles led to his withdrawing from the position.	Vacate is a later borrowing from Latin and is now withdraw from (in the sense of leave, give up) or override (in the legal meaning of cancel, annul).
vain (as in pointless)	idle	I grow tired of your idle chatter.	Also replaces vain in in vain, i.e., in idle, which is attested.
vain (as in conceited)	lenchful	The lenchful man never thought that he would lose.	From OE wlencu + -ful.
vainglory	idlewolder	Her idlewolder ended up being her downfall.	From OE īdele wuldor.
Vainglorious is a later formation and is now idlewolderful.
vale, valley	dale	He painted a picture of a dale.
value (as in monetary or relative worth)	worth	This gemstone is of great worth.	Valuable is a later formation and is now worthful.
value (as in moral value)	worth	His actions do not reflect the worths of our organization.	Meaning extended here based on the use of German Wert.
value (as in numerical value)	worth	What worth does this variable have?	Meaning extended here based on the use of German Wert.
value (verb)	worth	How much do you worth this necklace?	Based on OE gewyrþan.
vanish	swind	The magician suddenly made himself swind.	Rhymes with find. Past tense and past participle: swound (rhymes with found).
vanity (as in pointlessness)	idleness	He realized the idleness of his life.
vanity (as in conceit)	lench	The compliments only served to feed his lench.	From OE wlencu. Extended here to phrases related to appearance such as vanity table and vanity press.
veal	calfflesh	He cooked some calfflesh for dinner.	Or: calfmeat.
Can be shortened to: calf.
vein	edder	I could feel the blood rushing through my edders.	From ME edre. Meaning extended here to other meanings of vein such as its geological meaning.
vengeance	wreaking	I was driven by strong feelings of wreaking.	See avenge.
venison	hartflesh	I ate some hartflesh for dinner.	With replacement of deer with hart (see animal).
Or: hartmeat.
Can be shortened to: hart.
venom	yelster	Beware of snakes and their yelster.	From OE geolstor meaning corruption. Meaning extended here.
venomous	yelstery	He was nearly bitten by a yelstery snake.	From OE geolstrig.
verb	workword	Be and do are both workwords.	Calque of Dutch werkwoord.
One can also use tideword, a calque of German Zeitwort, or deedword, roughly based on German Tunwort.
verbal (as in pertaining to words)	wordly	I was tested on my wordly abilities.
verbal (as in spoken, oral)	spoken	The two formed a spoken agreement.
verbal (as in verbatim)	word-for-word	This is a word-for-word translation of the passage.
verbal (as in talkative)	speechful	He is a very speechful man.
verbal (as in pertaining to verbs)	workwordly	This writer uses many different workwordly auxiliaries.
verdant	green	The green fields lie beyond the forest.
verdict	doom	The judge gave him a guilty doom.	See judgment.
verify	asoothe	Could you asoothe this man's statements?	Based on ME isothien, with change of prefix.
Verification is a later French or Latin borrowing and is now asoothing.
verity	truth	What I have said is simply an eternal truth.
verse	ferse	Shakespeare's ferse is not hard to read.	From ME fers (< OE fers, a borrowing from Latin versus).
versify	ferse	I wish to ferse my thoughts.	From OE fersian.
very (intensifier)	highly	Be careful, for the dish is highly hot.	One can also use other intensifiers such as well and full (like in full well).
very (used with superlatives)	aller-	I want to be the allerbest like no one ever was.	From ME aller- (also appears in the variants alder- and alther-).
One can also use utterly, e.g., the very best thing > the utterly best thing.
very (as in absolutely)	utterly	That is the utterly same man that I'm talking about!	Also used with the adjective own, e.g., my very own house > my utterly own house.
very (as in absolute)	utter	This is what I've been saying from the utter beginning.	Also used for trivial effect, e.g., the very thought > the utter thought.
Extended here to mean exact, precise, e.g., the very heart of the matter > the utter heart of the matter.
very (as in same, identical)	ilk	I asked that ilk question the other day.	Now an archaic word.
Or: same (a Norse borrowing).
very (as in true, genuine)	true	He wondered whether he had seen the true god of peace just now.	Verily is a later formation and is now truly.
vessel (as in ship)	ship	The navy's ships have begun their voyage.
vessel (as in container)	fat	He stored the liquid in a fat.	Now a dialectal form of vat (originally a southern form). Fat is used here since initial /v/ in standard English is mainly due to French influence.
Meaning extended here to the anatomical use of vessel.
vice	lawter	Gambling is one of his lawters.	From ME laughter (spelled as lawter on this page to prevent confusion with laughter related to laugh).
Sin can be used, but has more of a religious connotation.
vicious (as in full of vice)	lawterful	The man indulged himself in lawterful pleasures.
vicious (as in inclined to be violent)	mean	Be careful, as that dog over there is quite mean.
vicious (as in brutal)	scathing	He made a scathing attack on my character.	Or: shathing (from OE sceaþan/sceaþian), as scathe is from Norse.
victor	syer	To the syer go the spoils.	From ME sy + -er.
victorious	syefast	He has had syefast battle these last few months.	From ME siʒʒefasst (< OE sigefæst).
victory	sye	He achieved sye after a long battle.	From ME sy.
vile	foul	Do not listen to that foul man.	Vilify is a later Latin borrowing and is now evilqueath (from OE yfelcweþan).
village	thorp	The news had still not reached the thorp.	Or: throp (from ME throp, as thorp shows Norse influence)
Villager is a later formation and is now thorpsman (or thropsman). The feminine is thorpswoman (or thropswoman).
villain (as in scoundrel)	shather	That shather stole my belongings!	From ME shathe (meaning evil person, criminal) + -er.
Extended here to its use in fiction.
villain, villein (as in feudal tenant)	lordchurl	Three lordchurls were working on the land.	Newly formed compound based on lord and churl (meaning peasant) based on the fact that villeins were legally bound to a feudal lord.
villainage, villeinage	lordchurlhood	Lordchurlhood was practiced in the kingdom.
villainous	shatherly	He spoke with a shatherly voice.
villainy	shatherhood	He told me many tales of that man's shatherhood.
vine (as in grapevine)	winetree	His garden was full of winetrees.	Now a dialectal word.
Vineyard is a later formation and is now wineyard (from OE wīnġeard).
vine (as in climbing plant)	climber	We climbed up the great tree's climbers.
vinegar	etched	Etched is used in many recipes.	From ME eced. Pronounced with two syllables.
vintage (as in harvest)	wineharvest	This year's weather led to a good wineharvest.	Calque of Dutch wijnoogst.
vintage (as in wine identified by year)	yeargang	The wine of that yeargang is excellent.	Calque of German Jahrgang.
Also used here as an attributive word, e.g., yeargang wine (for vintage wine).
vintage (as in class of objects made in a particular period)	yeargang	Cars of that yeargang are pretty sleek.	Also used attributively here, e.g., vintage book > yeargang book. This attributive use of vintage is from its use for wine.
vintner (as in wine merchant)	winemonger	I bought this bottle from the winemonger.	Obsolete form of vintner: vinter.
vintner (as in wine grower)	winegrower	This country is the home of several esteemed winegrowers.
violence	heast	Heast soon flooded the streets.	From ME heste.
violent	heasty	The drunken man quickly became heasty.
virgin	femmen	This is a painting of the femmen Mary.	From OE fǣmne.
In older uses, maiden can also be used to refer to virgins.
virginity	femmenhood	The lady had never lost her femmenhood.	From OE fǣmnhād.
virtue	douth	Being aware of one's weaknesses is a douth.	From ME douth. Meaning of virtue taken from OE.
virtuous	douthful	The lord was a douthful man.
viscount	underearl	The underearl is known for his charity.	Based on under- used for vice-, as viscount is essentially vice-count.
The feminine, viscountess, is probably a later formation and is now underearlen (see -ess).
The derivative viscountcy/viscounty is a later formation and is now underearldom.
vision (as in power of seeing)	sight	My sight has been getting worse these last few years.	Eyesight can also be used.
vision (as in mental image)	forestelling	He had a forestelling of a world without needless violence.	See imagination.
vision (as in ability to envision)	forestelling	He was rash and lacking in forestelling.	Envision is a later formation and is now forestell (see imagine).
vision (as in mental experience)	sight	This was revealed to me in a sight.	From an old use of sight.
vision (as in beautiful sight)	sight	She was simply a sight of loveliness.
voice	steven	She spoke with a rather loud steven.	Now a dialectal word. Rhymes with seven.
Also used for grammatical voice (a use attested in OE).
Extended here to be a verb with the same meaning as voice.
voyage	wayfare	His journal describes his wayfare to Asia.	One can also use fare by itself if the context is clear.
wait (as in stay, remain)	bide	I will bide for you here.	Old verb now found in the phrase bide one's time.
wait (as in serve)	thain	One of my duties is thaining tables.	See serve.
Waiter is a later formation and is now thainer.
Waitress is a later formation and is now thaineren (see -ess).
war	wye	The two countries went to wye.	From ME wi. Meaning of war taken from OE.
Also used as a verb (< OE wīgan), with meaning narrowed to engage in a war.
warden	headward	She works as the headward of the prison.	From head + ward (see guard).
Keeper can also be used (see guardian).
In compounds such as churchwarden, warden can be replaced with ward.
warder	quarternward	The quarternwards kept a close eye on the prisoners.	From OE cwearternweard (see prison and guard).
For older uses meaning guard, one can use ward.
warrant (legal)	leavewrit	He issued a leavewrit for his arrest.	Newly formed compound based on leave meaning permission and writ referring to a legal document.
warrant (as in justification)	ground	There is no ground for that conclusion.
warrant (as in allow)	give leave	The officer was given leave to enter the house.	Or: yeave, as give is from Norse. Past tense of yeave: yave, past participle: yeaven.
warrant (as in justify)	ground	The evidence grounds further investigation.	From an old use of ground.
warrant (as in affirm)	plight	He'll come any minute now, I plight.	From an old use of plight (see pledge).
Extended here to also mean give a warranty for.
warranty	plightwrit	The product comes with a three-year plightwrit.	Newly formed compound based on plight meaning pledge and writ referring to a legal document.
warrior	wyer	Many wyers fell in battle.	From ME wie (meaning warrior) + -er.
wizard	witchman	This is a school for aspiring witches and witchmen.	A rare but attested word.
The derivative wizardry is a later formation and is now witchcraft.
zeal	ellen	The preacher spoke with such ellen in his voice.	From ME ellen. Meaning of zeal taken from OE.
Zealous is a later Latin borrowing and is now ellenful.
zero	naught	Any number multiplied with naught gives you naught.	Alternatively spelled nought.
The word zero is also sometimes traced to Italian or Spanish. Nonetheless, no other Germanic languages have borrowed that word for the concept of zero. Rather, it appears that they use a form of null (a Latin borrowing). This use of null is attested in English.
Zeroth is a later formation and is now naughth (or noughth) or nullth (if one is willing to use null).