As an indirect result of the Norman Conquest, the use of French became prestigious in England, and many words from Old French later entered the English speech and replaced many native words. For example, one word for peace was frith.

In this page, words from both Anglo-French and continental French are included. Also, borrowings directly from Latin are excluded, so an Old French borrowing such as caitiff is included here, but the Latin word captive (from which caitiff developed) is not. This also excludes modern French borrowings such as chef and je ne sais quoi.

Despite the title, Middle French words are included as well, since even in late Middle English, French words were still borrowed. Most of these words are first attested before 1500 (an arbitrary starting point for Early New English), but a few words first attested in the sixteenth century are also included.

Note that the words in the lists are considered to have been borrowed from French. Native formations with these words are included in the Notes section, e.g., joy is a French borrowing, but joyful is a native formation that happens to use a French word and is translated in the Notes section.

For French influences on modern spelling, see here. For French influences on pronunciation, see here.

This page prioritizes native words over Old Norse borrowings, though Norse equivalents may be given in the Notes section. If the Norse word is simply a phonetic replacement of a native word, however, the Norse word is used, and the native form is listed in the Notes.

Words not listed
There are certain borrowings that are not translated here. Note that even though they are kept, it does not mean that they are unaltered. Certain words have been changed in their pronunciation to reverse any French influence. These words are put in bold.

Here, the French borrowings come from the same root as French borrowings in other Germanic languages if they are present in those languages as well. For example, for the word rabbit, the word coney is used instead of rabbit since the French root of coney is used in other Germanic languages. Even if the English form differs phonetically from the form in other Germanic languages, as long as the word comes from the same French word, it is allowed.

Foreign concepts

These words generally refer to a thing or concept that English speakers probably had no word for because it was foreign or unfamiliar to Englishmen. Though some of these things were introduced to England by the Normans, they are still left here anyway:

Alchemy - alchemy was introduced to England after the Conquest, and the other Germanic languages have borrowed the word as well.
Alchemist - this does not need to be altered since the other Germanic languages have adopted the word as well, and one can justify keeping -ist since the other Germanic languages have borrowed the suffix as well.
However, the adjectival form (e.g., alchemical, alchemistic) should be changed since the ending is generally replaced in the other Germanic languages with their cognate of -ish. Thus, the adjective is now alchemistish (compare with German alchemistisch).
Chess and checkmate - it appears that chess was introduced to England by the Normans, given the lack of mention of chess in Old English works, so it was natural that the name of the game and the key phrase should be borrowed from French.
Check - the word was originally used in chess to refer to a situation in which one has put the other player's king in immediate danger. From there came many senses related to stopping. This seems to have been a native development, since the word in French also has an additional sense development from its use in chess, but the additional meaning is failure and refers to the result of being stopped, not the act of stopping itself.
Note that the noun check in the sense of written order to a bank should always be spelled as check, since cheque shows influence from the related noun exchequer (which is translated here).
Coney - as rabbits are not native to Britain, it is not surprising that words referring to rabbits were borrowed after the Normans introduced them. But the historical pronunciation has /ʌ/, and one historical spelling of the word is cunny; the current pronunciation of coney is a spelling pronunciation, and the spelling with o is from French influence. As the Anglish spelling of coney would be cunny, and the aforesaid spelling pronunciation could no longer be made, the word should rhyme with honey. Of course, if this pronunciation is to be avoided because of its homophony with the vulgar word, then one can use cunning, an obsolete variant.
Note that rabbit is not kept here since other Germanic languages do not use a word coming from this root. It should also be noted that rabbit is not certain to have come from French.
Coral - the word originally referred to the red variety found in the Mediterranean, and all the other Germanic languages have borrowed the word.
Fay - the word was the original word for fairy, and most other Germanic languages have borrowed French fée as well. Fairies are a part of folklore and romance introduced from the continent, and given the variety in folklore, even with the similar concept of elves, Englishmen probably would have borrowed the word.
Note that the word fairy originally meant enchantment, fairyland (as etymologically the word is fay + -ery), but the word later changed in English to refer to the supernatural creature, probably from reinterpretation of the word in phrases like faerie knight. The current French word féerie means fairyland, fairy play, not referring to the creature itself, and it is the theatrical meaning that is used for the Germanic languages that borrow féerie. As a result, it cannot be assumed that English would have borrowed fairy anyway with its original meaning of enchantment, fairyland.
Norman and Normandy - these are foreign names, so they should not be translated.
Norman (language and adjective) - this should be changed, however, since for nationalities and languages, native English uses -ish instead. A replacement for this would be Normanish (or Normandish, based on OE Norþmandisc, though most other Germanic languages appear to derive it from their word for Norman rather than Normandy).
Nymph - this refers to a being from classical mythology, so it is no surprise that the word should have been borrowed. Though Old English used elfen (female elf) in a few compound words in an attempt to translate nymph, as most other Germanic languages have borrowed the word, it is assumed that English would have borrowed nymph as well.
Tyrant - the word originally referred to a ruler in ancient Greece that came to power unconstitutionally, so it is no surprise that other Germanic langauges have borrowed the word. Old English had lēodhata (literally people-hater) to translate the word in its meaning of cruel ruler, though the word was also used more generally, since it was used to refer to Holofernes (a general) as well as God (in reference to the act of killing all the first-born in Egypt). In any case, the modern English form comes from Old French; the expected form that English would have without French influence would be tyran, which accords nicely with derivatives such as tyranny.
Tyrannic(al), tyrannous - the word should now be tyranish.
A number of gemstones and minerals seem to have been unknown to England before the Norman Conquest.
Ruby
Sapphire
Emerald - all other Germanic languages appear to have borrowed the word from Latin smaragdus rather than its French descendant. If the English form accords with the form in other Germanic languages, then it should be smaragd (now a rare synonym for emerald).
Diamond
Serpentine
Turquoise - the current pronunciation has the foreign /ɔɪ/ and reflects the current French spelling rather than the older form borrowed in Middle English. Hence, the older form turkis (/ˈtɜːrkɪz/) should be used.
Color terms are quite tricky to work with because Old English speakers' perception of color was not the same as modern speakers', so it is uncertain how English speakers would view color without French influence.
Blue - the concept of blue as a distinct color did not seem to be present in Old English. Though Old English had a few words for varieties of blue, it seems that there was no basic color term for blue; the closest thing to a basic color term was hǣwen, but the fact that practically none of the native words for blue survived in Middle English (with scanty traces of hǣwen in the north) strongly suggests that the concept of blue had not existed for ordinary speakers. Other Germanic languages, however, have native words for blue; the Old English cognate to German blau would have been *blāw, the modern form of which would be *blow. As we wish to express the same basic colors as English, it is assumed here that Englishmen would have probably borrowed blue from French anyway.
On a related note, it seems that the OE forebear of brown had not become a basic color term; while it meant brown, it could also be used for other colors, as suggested by Latin glosses. The fact that it became a basic color term later on was probably assisted by French brun, which was almost identical in meaning and form and happens to be ultimately a borrowing from Germanic. Nonetheless, since the other Germanic languages now have their cognate of brown as a basic color term, and we wish to express the concept of brown, it is assumed here that English brown would have become a basic color term anyway.
Modern concepts

There are also words referring to modern concepts that simply did not exist in the Norman Conquest. Of course, there are modern concepts that can still be translated in Anglish, but the key criterion is that these words have also been borrowed from French or Latin by other Germanic languages (especially Icelandic).

Million and beyond - the concepts of million, billion, and other greater numbers as distinct units did not seem to exist in England. It is not hard to see why, as early speakers generally did not speak of numbers this high in daily life, and even now, numbers of that scale are more often found in more formal or specialized contexts. It is thus assumed that numbers like million and trillion would have still been borrowed later on.
Note that as part of the Germanic Stress Rule, Old English generally placed the stress on the first syllable of a word, so words like quadrillion should be pronounced with the first syllable stressed.
Second (time) and minute - the modern system of timekeeping was developed long after the Norman Conquest, so English probably would have borrowed second and minute like the other Germanic languages. Hour, on the other hand, can be translated since the word in timekeeping is simply an extended use of its general meaning of period of time.
General concepts

There are some words that expressed concepts that Old English speakers were probably aware of, but for whatever reason, they never bothered to have a word for them. Possibly, there was such a word, but is simply unattested because of historical accident.

Chart - there appears to be no attested Old English word for the meaning of map. To express this meaning, the other Germanic languages (including Icelandic) have (directly or indirectly) borrowed the word carte from French and may use it in a compound with land, e.g., German (Land)karte, Icelandic (landa)kort. Hence, chart (which shows an older form of French carte) would have likely been borrowed. Moreover, for clarity, one can use the newly formed compound landchart for the meaning of map.
Card (as in playing card) - the French word carte means both card and map, and thus, in other Germanic languages, the French borrowing has both meanings. The English word card was originally a variant of chart (also showing an unexplained voicing of the final consonant in the English form). The differentiation of meanings for chart and card is a development found in English and a few other Germanic languages such as Swedish, which uses both karta (map) and kort (card). Since Old English has no attested word for card, this word can be kept as well.
Cipher - there appears to be no Old English word for the concept of mathematical digits, and all other Germanic languages except Icelandic have borrowed the word from French and use it to refer to numerical figures. However, it seems that the English spelling was later made to look like a classical word, as the spelling uses ph (as if it had come from Greek, even though the Latin word actually comes from an Arabic word). To undo foreign influence in the spelling, we should use a spelling such as sifer. Note that cipher can still have the meaning of secret language, as French chiffre has the meaning of both digit and code.
Decipher - this appears to have been a formation inspired by French déchiffrer. As this uses the foreign prefix de-, a native formation would be uncipher.
Dance - though Old English had a few words for dance such as tumbian (related to tumble) and sealtian (a Latin loanword), it seemed that none of them was ever the general word for the concept, as words such as hoppian (hop) and tumbian had broader meanings related to movement. Even the word sealtian may have not been in general use, given its scanty attestations in Old English and its complete disappearance in Middle English. As most other European languages, including other Germanic languages (even Icelandic), have borrowed the word from French, which has wielded great influence in the arts, it is highly likely that English would have borrowed dance as well.
March (as in military march) - it seems that Old English had no word for the exact concept of walking in a regular and ordered manner (especially for military formations), and other European languages, including the Germanic ones, have borrowed the word from French, so English probably would have borrowed march as well.
Metal - though Old English had words for specific metals such as gold and silver, it seemed to have no general word for metal. Most other Germanic languages have borrowed the word from French, so it is likely that English would have borrowed metal as well.
Metallic - the word should now be metalish (with stress on the first syllable).
Music - In Old English, there were two words that had meanings related to music: drēam and glēo. The former word meant joy as well as sound that produces joy, which is why it often meant harmony. In Middle English, the word acquired the meanings of sound, noise, voice. Incidentally, it is uncertain whether this is the same word as the modern dream, as the latter word may have due to Norse influence or may have been unattested in OE. As for OE glēo, the word had the general meaning of entertainment, sport and also came to mean musical entertainment, minstrelsy. The word later became glee, which has the meaning of joy and also refers to a specific kind of singing. It appears that neither of these words truly acted as a general word for music in Old English, and since all other Germanic languages except Icelandic have borrowed the word from French or Latin, it is assumed here that English would have borrowed music from French. Note that the following should be used for the derivatives of music:
Musical (adjective) - musicly.
Musical (noun) - musicplay (newly formed compound using play meaning theatrical performance).
Musician - musicker.
Note that music here keeps its pronunciation, as it is assumed that the French form (which has /y/) would have been borrowed. The same has happened in Dutch, as muziek is from the French form. The Anglish spelling of music would be meƿsick.
Pilgrim - Old English did not seem to have a word for someone traveling to a holy site. All the other Germanic languages have borrowed the word from the Latin word, e.g., Dutch pelgrim, Danish pilgrim. Thus, English would have likely borrowed pilgrim as well.
Pilgrimage - this has the French suffix -age, so the word can be replaced with something like pilgrimfare.
Rhyme - Old English poetry generally did not use rhyme, as it used alliterative verse instead. Rhyming verse gradually became the main form of English verse after the Conquest. Notably, the word for rhyme in all the other Germanic languages, including Icelandic, ultimately comes from French. Note that the current spelling rhyme clearly shows association with Latin rhythmus, so an uninfluenced spelling would be rime.
Sauce - there is no attested Old English word for this, and it seems that the word for sauce in all other Germanic languages, including Icelandic, ultimately comes from French.
Spirit (in the sense of alcohol, volatile liquid) - this meaning appears to have come from its use in alchemy referring to a volatile substance, and most of the other Germanic languages appear to use the word for this as well.
Miscellaneous

Proud - this word was borrowed in late Old English (but before the Conquest). Old English certainly had native words to mean proud, e.g., ofermōdig (literally overmoody). It seems that OE prūd had begun to be commonly used, as it is attested with a number of derivatives such as prūtscipe and oferprūd. Hence, even though this word is certainly from French, it seems to have already found its place in common vocabulary by the time of the Conquest. As a result, pride (an analogical derivative formed by umlaut) is kept as well.
The twelve months - all the current names (ultimately from Latin) are used in other Germanic languages, including Icelandic, so it is assumed that English would have adopted these names later (for more about the native names, see here). That said, the pronunciation of some of these names shows French influence because French has influenced how we read certain letters (see here for more), and some of these forms are French rather than Latin. It is assumed here that all these names are taken from the genitive singular (which is used to derive the stem of Latin nouns), but it should be noted that the Germanic languages have been quite inconsistent on whether the final vowel should be retained, as shown in Dutch januari and German Januar. If the word has a new spelling, then it is provided alongside the Anglish spelling (note that since these are originally foreign names, certain letters such as J are kept).
January - pronounced as /ˈjænəɛri/. Spelling: Yanuary (Anglish spelling: Januarie).
February - pronounced as /ˈfɛbrəɛri/, and the Anglish spelling is Februarie.
March - pronounced as /ˈmɑːrti/. Spelling: Marty (Anglish spelling: Martie).
April - no change needed.
May - no change needed, but the Anglish spelling is Maj (since English spelling usually avoids having spellings end with i).
June - pronounced as /ˈjaʊni/. Spelling: Yowny (Anglish spelling: Junie).
July - pronounced as /ˈjaʊli/. Spelling: Yowly (Anglish spelling: Julie).
August - no change needed.
September - pronounced as /ˈsɛptɪmbər/.
October - pronounced as /ˈɒktəbər/.
November - pronounced as /ˈnɒvɪmbər/.
December - pronounced as /ˈdɛt͡ʃɪmbər/. Spelling: Dechember (Anglish spelling: December).
Standard French words
If certain French words are borrowed by all other major Germanic languages (including Icelandic), then it will be mentioned that they are common Germanic borrowings.

Subpages:

A-D
E-I
J-O
P-S
T-Z
Standard French affixes
French word	English word	Example derivatives	Notes
-ery (place)	house	bakery > bakehouse	For some words, a word other than house may be better, e.g., fishery > fishstead.
-ess	-en	priestess > priesten	A native feminine ending that survives only in vixen (originally a dialectal variant of fixen, feminine of fox) and archaic minchen (feminine of monk).
Note that goddess is now gidden from OE gyden (derived from god and showing umlaut).
-ic (adjectival suffix)	-ish	Hellenic > Hellenish	Based on how Old English and other Germanic languages often use -ish to translate Latin -icus.
Note that the main stress is now on the first syllable.
-ly may also work, but for nationalities and languages, -ish should be used, so Icelandic is now Icelandish.
-ical is a variant formed with -al and can often be replaced with -ish or -ly (if needed for differentiation).
-ment (from verbs)	-ing	acknowledgment > acknowledging	
-ment (from adjectives)	-ness	merriment > merriness	
Archaic or dialectal French words
French word	English word	Example sentence	Notes
affray (as in frighten)	afear	The sound of thunder afears me very much.	Now a dialectal word. The past participle afeared is used in the same way as afraid (etymologically the past participle of affray).
caitiff (as in wretch)	wretch	That man is nothing but a worthless wretch.	The adjectival form is now wretched.
disport (as in amusement)	spill	The king often went hunting in the words for spill.	See sport.
disport (as in pastime)	spill	Many spills were held in the festival.	See sport.
disport (as in frolic)	spill	Young men like to go to the countryside to spill.	See sport.
evangel (as in gospel)	gospel	Reading the gospel was very enlightening.	For the meaning of evangelist (which appears to be from Greek, according to the OED), gospeler can be used.
gest (as in heroic deed)	ellendeed	The knight spoke of his ellendeeds.	From OE ellendǣd. Extended here to also mean tale of a heroic deed.
mappemonde (as in world map)	worldchart	The cartographer drew up a worldchart.	Note that for map (which is either from Latin mappa or a shortening of this word), the French word chart is used and is deemed an acceptable borrowing here (see chart above).
oliphant (as in elephant)	elp	He saw many elps in India.	From ME elp, a shortened form of OE elpend.
Obsolete form of elephant (a Latin loanword).
Other Germanic languages except Icelandic have borrowed the Latin word for this. Interestingly, the word for elephant in Icelandic is an Old Norse borrowing from Arabic.
oliphant (as in ivory horn)	elpsbonehorn	The guard sounded the elpsbonehorn.	Newly formed compound (see ivory).
orphanity (as in orphanhood)	stepbarnhood	Her stepbarnhood made many people pity her.	See orphan.
parage (as in lineage)	strind	The nobleman was of high strind.	See lineage.
parage (as in equality in rank)	evendom	There was no evendom between the two brothers.	From even + -dom. Extended here to refer to the feudal institution.
Note that the general word for equality is evenness.
paynim (as in pagan)	heathen	The heathens believed in more than one god.	Obsolete form of pagan (a Latin loanword).
Obsolete variant of paynim: payen.
In its old meaning of pagandom, one can use heathendom.
physic (as in physician's practice)	leechcraft	The student has spent three years studying leechcraft.	Now an archaic word.
physic (as in remedy, medicine)	leechcraft	He was told to take his leechcraft every two days.	Now an archaic word.
physic (as in treat with a medicine)	leech	Your sickness will be leeched with this medicine.	Now an archaic word.
pie (as in magpie)	awe	I heard a bunch of awes chattering.	From OE agu.
Pied (meaning having two or more colors) is now bleefow (from OE blēofāh, see color). Note that fow rhymes with grow.
Piebald is now aweish (adjective) and aweish deer (noun, see animal).
poesy (as in poem)	leeth	He wrote a leeth about war.	See poem.
poesy (as in poetry)	leethcraft	Old English leethcraft is known for its alliterative verse.	See poetry.
posy (as in poetic composition engraved in a ring)	leethquid	She read the leethquid in her ring.	From OE lēoþcwide (meaning poem).
posy (as in nosegay)	blossomknitchock	He gathered some blossoms to make a blossomknitchock.	Newly formed compound using knitch (a dialectal word meaning bundle) and -ock (diminutive suffix found in hillock). Calque of German Blumensträußchen.
Or: blossomknitchling (as diminutive -ling is from Norse).
presidence (as in act of presiding)	foresitting	What are the signs of God's foresitting over human affairs?	
presidence (as in office of president)	foresittership	Several controversial laws were passed under his foresittership.	This is also used for presidency (a later Latin borrowing).
promission (as in promise)	behote	He failed to uphold his behote.	See promise.
promit (as in promise)	behote	I behote to stay with you.	See promise.
tray (as in betray)	forread	Why did he forread his master?	From ME forreden. Extended here to also mean reveal unintentionally.
Also used for betray (which is etymologically be- + tray).
treacher (as in deceiver)	swike	He utterly loathes swikes.	From ME swike.
Grammar
This section talks about grammatical changes in morphology and syntax that have often been attributed to French influence.

Thou

English once had distinct forms for the second person: thou for the singular, and ye for the plural. In Early New English, thou became disused, and you (originally the accusative of ye) became the standard form for both singular and plural. How did you manage to replace thou? The reason is tied to the T-V distinction, in which the plural pronoun can be used as a "formal" singular, and the singular as an "informal" singular. For example, one would address a superior with the V form out of politeness. Likewise, the T form could also be used to address inferiors. For example, a master might address his servant with the T form. Because of this connotation, it became safer to address others with the V form, which is why you prevailed in the end.

Where did the T-V distinction come from? It was not present in Old English, as þū was simply singular, with no connotation of informality or inferiority. The use of thou as an informal singular arose in Middle English and was modeled after French use, since the T-V distinction was present in Old French. Though the uses of thou and ye did not completely match those of tu and vous, the fact that there was a distinction to begin with stems from French influence. Hence, without French influence, there would have been no T-V distinction to link thou to inferiority, and thou would still be used.

How do the other Germanic languages use the second-person pronouns? The T-V distinction is not attested in Gothic, Old English, and Old Norse, so it is clear that Proto-Germanic strictly followed a number distinction. At some point in the Germanic languages, this state of affairs changed.

For the West Germanic languages:

German now has du as the informal singular, ihr as the informal plural, and Sie as the formal singular and plural. Originally, ihr (second-person plural) was the formal singular, so du and ihr corresponded to French du and vous. But at some point, er (third-person singular masculine) and sie (the third-person plural) came to be used as the formal pronoun instead, with the latter prevailing in the end. The use of the third person for the second person appears to be from the use of indirect forms as a form of politeness; compare this with how we use Your Majesty to address a king or a queen.
Dutch has jij as the informal singular, jullie as the informal plural, and u as the formal singular and plural. Dutch formerly had du and gij as the second-person pronouns, the former as the informal pronoun, the latter as the formal pronoun. Like English, however, gij (and jij, a variant) came to be used more and more as a singular in all contexts, and so du fell out of use. However, u, the accusative and dative of gij, came to be used as the new formal singular, perhaps from a shortening of a phrase such as uwe edelheid (your nobility). In any case, a new plural jullie was formed from jij and lui (people), and at some point, gij fell out of use in favor of jij.
West Frisian has do as the informal singular, jo as the formal singular, and jim(me) as the plural in all contexts. Like English, jo was originally the accusative and dative of ji, but it replaced the old nominative. As for jim(me), this appears to have come from a contraction using ji and men (men).
In short, all the other West Germanic languages have gained a T-V distinction and have kept it, though they drastically differ on the forms used. West Frisian shows the most straightforward correspondence to French tu and vous, with the addition of a separate plural pronoun. It is possible that French influence was responsible for this distinction entering Dutch and German, as French influence has affected those languages as well, though not to the same dramatic degree as it has affected English. As Dutch influence has affected West Frisian, it is possible that it was introduced to West Frisian through Dutch.

As for the North Germanic languages:

Danish uses du as the informal singular, De as the formal singular and plural, and I as the informal plural. The use of de (the third-person plural) appears to be based on the German model. Interestingly, the T-V distinction appears to be waning, as it is becoming more usual to use du in all contexts instead.
Norwegian uses du as the informal singular, De as the formal singular and plural, and dere as the informal plural. Like Danish, de is the third-person plural, so the use of De appears to be based on German Sie. The T-V distinction too seems to have disappeared for the most part.
Swedish uses du as the singular and ni as the plural. Interestingly, it seems that Swedish formerly used titles as a way to address people for formality, but this became cumbersome, so around the early 20th century, du came to be used more often, as well as ni as a singular. However, this use of ni became seen as objectionable, so as part of the "du-reform", du became the universal singular, and ni is now rarely used as a formal singular and may even cause offense if used as such.
Icelandic uses þú as the singular and þið as the plural. The latter was originally the second-person dual, and þér the second-person plural, and the historical plural came to be used as a formal singular, whereas the historical dual became the plural. The T-V distinction seems to be no longer followed in general.
In short, the North Germanic languages seem to have adopted the T-V distinction only relatively recently and are far more inclined to abandon it in favor of the original singular. Danish and Norwegian adopted the German model, whereas Swedish adopted the French model instead. Icelandic is unique in forming a T-V distinction with the historical dual and plural pronouns.

It can be argued that even without the Norman Conquest, English would have adopted the T-V distinction from French influence anyway. Of course, there is no way of knowing for sure whether it would have followed the West Germanic languages in adopting it or the North Germanic languages in not adopting the T-V distinction until much later (and then abandoning it in favor of keeping thou as the universal singular). What is certain is that Old English had no T-V distinction, so following Old English in this aspect would keep thou and ye/you separate in terms of number only.

For a guide on how to use thou, see here.

More and most

In English, we often use more and most to form the comparative and superlative of adjectives, particularly long ones, e.g., more intricate, most delicate. Meanwhile, the suffixes -er and -est are usually used with short adjectives, especially native ones, e.g., smaller, tallest. But the periphrastic construction with more and most was not always present in English. According to the OED, in Old English, traces of periphrastic comparison using adverbs such as bet and swiþor can be found with participles and occasionally adjectives. However, the main way to form the comparative and the superlative was with suffixes, i.e., inflectional comparison. Periphrastic comparison (alongside the use of more and most for this) is sporadically found in Middle English until the 14th century.

This use of more and most is often attributed to the French model, which uses plus for the comparative and le plus for the superlative. One obvious problem with this is that most does not correspond to le plus in structure, so it is questionable whether most was modeled on le plus. Nevertheless, the timing of the growth of the periphrastic construction aligns with when French influence was strong in Middle English. Alternatively, the construction may have (also) been influenced by the Latin model, which uses magis for the comparative and maxime for the superlative for certain adjectives.

How do the other Germanic languages form the comparative and the superlative? For the West Germanic languages, it seems that inflectional endings are generally used, but occasionally, adverbs corresponding to more and most can be used. More is also used for comparing two qualities, e.g., he is more reckless than stupid. Nonetheless, the use of adverbs for comparison is not the norm.

As for the North Germanic languages, it seems that Old Norse had only inflectional comparison. Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish also generally use inflectional endings, but more and most are used for certain adjectives such as participial adjectives and long adjectives. In Icelandic, more and most are apparently not used at all except for indeclinable adjectives. In short, it seems that except Icelandic, the North Germanic languages have more use of periphrastic comparison, though inflectional comparison is still general.

It is uncertain how much the English use of more and most for the comparative and the superlative was due to French influence. What is more certain is that the periphrastic construction existed in Old English, but it remained rare until the 14th century, a time when French influence was strong.

If one wishes to stop using more and most, then here are some guidelines:

The suffixes -er and -est are added to any adjective or adverb, regardless of length, e.g., heavenly, heavenlier, heavenliest, worshipful, worshipfuller, worshipfullest, quickly, quicklier, quickliest.
The idiomatic phrases more and more and more or less do not need to be changed.
More is still used for comparing two qualities, so he is more sad than angry does not need to be changed.
Most meaning very (e.g., a most unfortunate event) is replaced with an adverb such as utterly or highly.
For adjectival compounds, only the second element should be inflected, e.g., blue-green, blue-greener, blue-greenest, heart-healthy, heart-healthier, heart-healthiest. Any adverbial derivatives should be inflected likewise, e.g., heart-healthily, heart-healthilier, heart-healthiliest.
If the second half of the compound is a participle or an -ed derivative of a noun, then the first element should be inflected if it is an adjective or an adverb, e.g., well-selling, better-selling, best-selling, well-behaved, better-behaved, best-behaved, high-pitched, higher-pitched, highest-pitched (but: heartbreaking, heartbreakinger, heartbreakingest since heart is not an adjective or an adverb). Any adverbial derivatives should probably be inflected likewise, e.g., well-behavedly, better-behavedly, best-behavedly.
Of-construction

In Old English, of was simply a preposition meaning from, out of and was not exactly the prepositional equivalent of the genitive case (which marks various relations, possession being one of the commonest). So expressions such as a man of Rome and a house of stone would make sense, as the original sense of the preposition would be keenly felt, but expressions such as a recital of the song and the city of London would not make any sense.

In Middle English, however, of rapidly became used as a genitive equivalent, replacing the genitive ending for many uses such as partition (e.g., one of the ships) and description (e.g., a man of holy life). In other words, the core meaning of from was no longer always evident in the of-construction. It is common to assume that French influence (that is, influence from French de) was responsible for this or at least greatly strengthened the use of of.

One can argue that the existence of the of-construction for the genitive does not need to be attributed to French. One reason is that the use of a preposition to express genitive meaning aligns with the greater use of prepositions in English to make up for the loss and simplification of case inflections. Another reason is that other Germanic languages that have also experienced case simplification use an of-construction as well. For the West Germanic languages:

German still has the genitive case, but often, von can be used instead, so for my teacher's book, one can say das Buch meines Lehrers or das Buch von meinem Lehrer.
Dutch uses van. -s is used for the genitive of proper nouns and some pronouns.
West Frisian uses fan. -s for the genitive is apparently used in literary contexts.
As for the North Germanic languages:

Danish uses af as well as -s for the genitive of nouns.
Norwegian and Swedish use av as well as -s for the genitive of nouns.
Icelandic still has the genitive case.
In short, German and Icelandic, both of which still use a good deal of case inflection, have kept the genitive, but the former has developed an of-construction. Meanwhile, the other Germanic languages that have greatly simplified case systems use prepositions to express genitive meaning, though the North Germanic languages also use -s for the genitive. Thus, there is good reason to believe that even without the Norman Conquest, English would have developed an of-construction anyway.

However, it seems likely that in Middle English, French de contributed to the rapid growth of the of-construction, and without French influence, the of-construction might not be used to the same extent as it is used now. Hence, it may be better to use the genitive rather than of in some cases. For example:

The works of Shakespeare > Shakespeare's works.
The accomplishments of the Romans > The Romans' accomplishments.
Word formation
The pickpocket compound

There are certain English compounds that consist of verb + object to form nouns that show someone or something doing the action shown by the verb, e.g., pickpocket (someone who picks pockets), scarecrow (something that scares crows), breakfast (something that breaks one's night fast). This kind of compound is often called a pickpocket compound.

In Old English, the usual way to form compounds was noun + noun, e.g., mannslaga (man-slayer). Verb + noun compounds existed, but were not of the pickpocket type, e.g., bærn-īsen (branding-iron). These patterns of course continue in New English, e.g., firefighter, drawbridge, though for verb + noun, we generally use an -ing noun, e.g, living room, drawing board.

The key aspect of these compounds is that they were endocentric, that is, one part of the compound acts as the head, and the other a qualifier. Germanic languages generally use endocentric compounds, the head being on the right, so an endocentric compound XY is a kind of Y, e.g., a yearbook is a kind of book, a whetstone is a kind of stone. In contrast, pickpocket compounds are not endocentric, since a pickpocket is not a kind of pocket, nor is a scarecrow a kind of crow.

The pickpocket compound is rare or nonexistent in Germanic languages, so it is clear that this is not a native Germanic compounding form. But it is common in most Romance languages, including French. For example:

French lave-vaisselle (wash dishes, i.e., a dishwasher).
Spanish cortatubos (cut pipes, i.e., a pipecutter).
Italian portacenere (carry ash, i.e., an ashtray).
As for English, this kind of compounding arose in Middle English as early as the 13th century, when French influence began to substantially affect English, so it is clear that this form of compounding became common in English because of French influence. Hence, words like breakfast and telltale may consist of entirely Germanic words, but they are essentially French in their formation.

Incidentally, surnames like Shakespeare and Makepeace show this pattern as well. According to one researcher (who wrote her thesis researching the history of this kind of compound), there are a few names of this pattern in late Old English before the Conquest. But these show influence from the continent, since Romance languages had already developed this new way to form names. In other words, it seems that the verb + noun pattern was first introduced to pre-Conquest Old English as a new way to make names, but its later development for agent nouns in Middle English was due to French influence.

To change any pickpocket compounds to a native form of compounding, one can use the object + verb-er or verb-ing form (depending on which one fits the sense more). For example:

scarecrow > crowscarer
breakfast > fastbreaking
telltale > taleteller (noun) or taletelling (adjective).
Tens-ones order

The usual way to form the numbers from 21 to 99 is tens-ones, so 21 is twenty-one, and 77 is seventy-seven. However, this was not always the case. Old English used the Germanic way of ones-and-tens, and this lasted until some time in New English, so 21 is one-and-twenty. In fact, this is essentially the same order used for 13 to 19, as 17 is etymologically seven-ten. Even though it is no longer obvious that teen represents an older form of ten, one can tell from the fact that seven is placed first that the order is backwards from how the digits are ordered. For the ordinal numbers, only the second element is changed, so twenty-first was formerly one-and-twentieth.

Why did this order change for 21 to 99? A common explanation is French influence since many of the French numbers are similarly formed (though this stops after 69 since 70-99 uses the vigesimal system). For example, for 21-23:

21 - vingt et un (twenty and one)
22 - vingt-deux (twenty-two)
23 - vingt-trois (twenty-three)
The ordinal numbers are formed similarly as well, with the second element suffixed.

21st - vingt et unième (twenty and first)
22nd - vingt-deuxième (twenty-second)
23rd - vingt-troisième (twenty-third)
As for its history in English, the tens-ones order sporadically appeared in Old English glosses of Latin words, with the possible addition of and, so the order could also be tens-and-ones, e.g., tuoentig feuer (twenty-four), feortig ⁊ sex (forty and six). Hence, it is clear that the tens-ones order was merely a word-for-word translation of the original Latin and was not actually in common use, and the modern form should not be traced to Old English.

The tens-ones order begins to be attested in normal use in the late 15th century. By that point, French had already greatly influenced English. Hence, it is possible that French influence introduced the tens-ones order or caused it to overthrow the old Germanic order of ones-and-tens. The ones-and-tens order continued to be used in Early New English, but by the eighteenth century, it had been relegated to dialectal or literary use.

It should also be noted that the other West Germanic languages form their numbers with the ones-and-tens order. For 21:

German - einundzwanzig
Dutch - eenentwintig
West Frisian - ienentweintich
As for the North Germanic languages:

Old Norse - einn ok tuttugu (one and twenty) or tuttugu ok einn (twenty and one)
Danish - enogtyve (one-and-twenty). Note that Danish has quite an unusual system starting from 50.
Norwegian - tjueén (twenty-one), but this was a relatively recent change as part of a reform in 1951. The traditional form used the ones-and-tens structure, so twenty-one can also be said as én og tyve.
Swedish - tjugoen (twenty-one)
Icelandic - tuttugu og einn (twenty and one).
In short, the North Germanic languages show more variety. Old Norse had both options, but Danish uses only the ones-and-tens order. Norwegian uses both, the ones-and-tens being the older form. Swedish and Icelandic both use the tens-ones order (the latter language using the conjunction as well).

Though some of the North Germanic languages use the tens-ones order, the fact that this structure only begins to be attested in normal use in late Middle English heavily suggests that its emergence in English was not due to Norse influence. Thus, French influence is a likelier source of the change.

In the end, it is not quite certain whether the change from one-and-twenty to twenty-one was a result of French influence or a native change, but what is certain is that the ones-and-tens order is older and native.

If one wishes to use the old order again, then the rules are:

For 21-99, the form is ones-and-tens, so 35 is five-and-thirty.
The ordinal suffix is attached only to the tens number, and the ones number remains unchanged, so 57th is seven-and-fiftieth.
The old order is used only for the tens and ones numbers. For numbers starting from 100, the other numbers remain in the same place, so 249 is two hundred nine-and-forty.
Titles before names

It is sometimes suggested that the use of titles such as king and queen before names (e.g., King Arthur) is due to French influence. The reason is that in Old English, titles were usually placed after the name, and the fact that this changed in Middle English has sometimes been seen as a result of French influence, since in French, the title precedes the name.

According to the scholar Mustanoja, there have been various changes in the use of a noun or an adjective with names:

Adjective + name - in Old English, the definite article is used, e.g., the young Mary. In Middle English, this use continues, though the use without the definite article arises, e.g., Young John.
Name + adjective - in Old English, the definite article is used, and this continues in Middle English, e.g., Artemis the swift. Examples without the article are rare.
Noun + name - in Old English, the definite article is used, e.g., the king Arthur. In Middle English, examples without the article occasionally appear early on. In ordinary prose, the use of the definite article is usual, e.g., the goddess Athena. However, for nouns indicating a title or a rank, there is a good deal of variety, though there is a tendency to drop the article for king and queen. When king is followed by a personal name + of-phrase, there is a strong tendency to drop the article, e.g., King Alfred of England. Other titles such as bishop and prince show variety as well, but the article tends to be dropped in later Middle English. Nouns for polite address without explicit reference to rank such as sir and master do not use the article.
Name + noun - in Old English, the definite article is usually not used, e.g., Alfred King. This use continues in Middle English and often appears when an of-phrase appears after the noun, e.g., Elizabeth, queen of England.
Mustanoja does not think that there is a reason to assume that French influence was responsible for the lack of the article in the noun + name order.

As for which order was common in Old English, it seems that the original order was name + noun (with or without the definite article). However, according to one researcher, a significant number of noun + name instances is found in Bede's Ecclesiastical History and the post-Conquest entries of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. Even though the former is a Latin translation, this structure does not seem to have been due to Latin influence.

The researcher also suggests that the infrequency of noun + name in Old English was due to the fact that the order was mainly used to refer to something already established in the discourse (discourse-old), whereas there are more name + noun uses referring to something new in the discourse (discourse-new). In other words, noun + name was strongly correlated with discourse-old contexts. This is important because apparently, in Bede's Ecclesiastical History and the later Anglo-Saxon Chronicle entries, the discourse is generally full of longer descriptions centered on more than one character, which explains why the noun + name was used more often; it was used to clearly refer back to people already introduced. In contrast, the earlier Chronicle entries were mostly short and often mentioned a person only once or twice, which meant that there was no need for the noun + name order to be used. In short, the higher rate of use of the noun + name order in late Old English and early Middle English was probably due to the texts' context simply requiring more use of the order for clarity, and the order may have been not so rare after all.

How do the other Germanic languages say King Alfred? For the West Germanic languages:

German uses König Alfred.
Dutch uses Koning Alfred.
West Frisian uses Kening Alfred.
As for the North Germanic languages:

Danish and Norwegian use Kong Alfred.
Swedish uses Kung Alfred.
Icelandic uses Alfreð konungur.
In the end, it appears that the noun + name order was an uncommon alternative in Old English, but this may have been accidental because of the contexts of the texts. The noun + name order seemed to be already common in the late 11th century (not too long after the Conquest), and at that point, French influence on vocabulary had not grown great yet. While French influence could have contributed to the growth of this order, it seems unnecessary as an explanation for the noun + name order becoming the main order in English.

-ery words
The -ery suffix is quite productive and has even attached itself to native words, e.g., bakery. The following is a list of native formations using the suffix.

Native formations that use either native or French words as the base are included, but -ery words that are borrowed from French are not included. For example, foolery is included since it is a native formation that uses the French word fool as its base, but fairy (which is etymologically fay-ery) is not included since fairy was borrowed wholesale from French and was not a native formation.

Note that a few other Germanic languages have borrowed this suffix as well, but this section still translates words with -ery anyway.

Original word	New word	Example sentence	Notes
bakery	bakehouse	He bought a cake at the bakehouse.	
brewery	brewhouse	He wants to open a brewhouse someday.	
cookery	cooking	I decided to take cooking classes.	
eatery	eathouse	I ate lunch at a nearby eathouse.	A newly formed compound.
fishery	fishstead	The local fishsteads contribute much to our economy.	A newly formed compound.
greenery	greenness	The greenness of this place is breathtaking.	
Pickpocket compounds
As explained here, compound words that are called pickpocket compounds are indirectly due to French influence since this form of compounding was introduced to English through French. This is a list of pickpocket compounds, even those that are partly or wholly made up of Germanic elements.

Old compound	New compound	Example sentence	Notes
breakfast	fastbreaking	I usually eat eggs for fastbreaking.	Or: fastenbreaking (since fast may be Norse), fastbritch/fastenbritch (from OE fæstenbrice; note that breach is French).
breakneck	neckbreaking	The racers are going at neckbreaking speed!	
ceasefire	firestopping	The two countries agreed to a firestopping.	Cease is French.
cutthroat	throatcutting	This is a rather throatcutting industry.	Or: throatsnithing (using native and dialectal snithe since cut is of uncertain origin).
daredevil (noun)	devildarer	The devildarer drove recklessly on the highway.	
daredevil (adjective)	devildaring	You are a rather bold and devildaring man.	
dreadnought	noughtdreader	The men set sail on the noughtdreader.	Alternatively spelled naughtdreader.
flashlight	lightflasher	I can't see anything; where's the lightflasher?	
sawbones	bonesawer	The bonesawer managed to save me.	
scarecrow	crowscarer	The farmer placed a crowscarer in the field.	Or: crowfrightener (since scare is Norse).
spoilsport	gameletter	That smart aleck is such a gameletter.	Based on the obsolete word letgame (in which let means hinder).
tattletale	taletattler	No one wants to be seen as a taletattler.	Note that tattle is from Dutch.
telltale (noun)	taleteller	The man is nothing but a sneaky taleteller.	
telltale (adjective)	taletelling	His glance was a taletelling sign of his true intentions.	