/k/ instead of /tʃ/:

Norse word	English word	Example sentence	Notes
bishopric	bishoprich	I do not know when this bishoprich was founded.	From ME bishoprich(e).
dike	ditch	The king has bidden me to build a ditch.	Dike may be from Norse díki or the inflected OE form dīcas.
icicle	icitchel	There were several icitchels hanging above.	From ME ychele. Icicle is etymologically ice-ickle (in which ickle means the same thing as icicle).
Palatalization would be expected in OE forms such as gicel. Interestingly, according to the OED, ickle is now mainly found in northern and midlands dialects, which may suggest Norse influence. There are also attested forms showing an o vowel such as ȝokyll and ice-schokle, which appear to be due to Norse jǫkull.
However, it is possible that /k/ in icicle is due to an unattested native variant *gicol (akin to Norse jǫkull) rather than influence from the Norse word.
kettle	chettle	The pot should not call the chettle black.	Now an obsolete form.
like (as in alike)	lich	We are of lich minds.	Native form shown in the related noun lich meaning corpse.
Like may be from Norse líkr or inflected OE forms such as gelīcne and gelīcre. Additionally, like may show influence from the noun like (< OE gelīca).
reck	retch	He retches little of worldly things.	From ME recchen. A seek-verb.
The adjective reckless should now be retchless.
seek	seech	I seech the truth.	From ME sechen. A seek-verb.
The native form survives in beseech.
think (as in ponder)	thench	I like to thench about the future.	From ME thenchen. A seek-verb.
think (as in seem)	thinch	It thincheth to me that he is hiding something.	From ME thinchen. A seek-verb.
This think is found only in the archaic word methinks.
The past tense thought (OE þūhte) would have normally come to rhyme with drought (compare with the phonetic development in ME dughti > NE doughty). That it now rhymes with bought is from influence of thought (past tense of think, now thench) when the two verbs became confused. To differentiate this verb from thench, one can have this thought rhyme with drought.
work (verb)	worch	What art thou worching on?	Now a dialectal form. A seek-verb.
Note that the noun work (< OE weorc) ends with /k/ as expected. Despite this, the noun seems to have been only a minor influence in the southern dialects, which still preferred the palatal variant for the verb.
/sk/ instead of /ʃ/:

Norse word	English word	Example sentence	Notes
scab	shab	You ought to stop picking on your shab.	Found in shabby.
scale (as in the weighing instrument)	shale	I weighed myself using a shale.	From OE cognate.
Scot	Shot	My neighbor comes from Shotland.	From the OE form, which was an early borrowing from Latin Scotus.
/sk/ in the current forms may have (also) been due to French or later Latin influence.
scrape	shrape	I have shraped my knee.	From OE cognate.
/g/ instead of /j/:

Norse word	English word	Example sentence	Notes
again	ayen	We shall be able to work ayen.	From ME ayen.
against	ayenst	The knight fought ayenst the dragon.	
egg (noun)	ey	When will the ey hatch?	From ME ei (showing vocalization of /j/). Rhymes with clay.
Plural: eyren.
garth	clausteryard	I sat beneath the tree in the clausteryard.	Based on the phrase cloister garth. Clauster is from an OE borrowing of Latin claustrum.
Garth in its old meaning of yard can be replaced with yard.
gear (as in equipment)	yarrow	My fishing yarrow is gone.	From OE gearwe.
get	yet	I will not foryet this any time soon.	PST: yat, PTCP: yetten.
OE cognate only in derivatives. Base yet was a rare backformation.
give	yeave	I have yeaven Emily the watch that you yave me last year.	PST: yave, PTCP: yeaven.
Note that the natural reflex of OE gefan is yeave (yive seemed to be a less common variant in ME).
guest	yest	The host warmly welcomed the yest.	
/ŋ/ (historical /ng/) instead of /ndʒ/:

Norse word	English word	Example sentence	Notes
ring (as in ring a bell)	ringe	I told him to ringe the bell.	From OE cognate.
OE hringan is akin to Norse hringja and thus should have had a historical /j/ causing palatalization. Given the lack of clear spelling for palatal g after /n/ in OE and ME, it is not immediately clear what caused the verb to have historical /g/ instead. It may have been influenced by Norse hringja, but historical /g/ may have been generalized from inflected forms like hringdon, which had velar /g/ because the palatalized consonant stood before a consonant.
It should be noted that in Middle English, ringen came to be conjugated as an irregular verb by analogy with verbs like sing, so the past tense and the past participle show vowel changes. For this analogy to happen, the verb must have already come to have /g/ in the infinitive. Forms such as rungen can be found early on, and one early work showing irregular forms is Body and Soul, a late 12th century work written in a Southwest Midlands dialect, so the change to /g/ in the infinitive may have been a native development instead.
string	stringe	One can control this puppet with its stringes.	From OE cognate.
It is difficult to determine whether the word may have been influenced by the Norse cognate strengr because of the lack of distinct spelling for the sound in Middle English.
