Norse word	English word	Example sentence	Notes
across (as in to the other side of)	over	I jumped over the river.	One alternative is through.
across (as in at the other side of)	over	What do you think lies over the mountains?	One alternative is beyond.
ado	to-do	This is much to-do about nothing.	A- in ado is at used as an infinitive marker from Norse influence.
aloft	alift	The glass was held alift.	Lift (meaning air) is the native cognate of loft.
anger (noun)	wrath	You need to control your wrath.	
anger (verb)	wrath	You must not wrath the dragon.	From ME wratthen.
Or: wrothen (from wroth + -en).
angry	wroth	That made him very wroth.	
ankle	anclee	I felt something crawling on my anclee.	From ME ancle.
arrow	streel	The bowman stowed many streels in his quiver.	From ME strele. Another native alternative is flone from ME flon.
Arrow is sometimes traced to Norse, but it may have been a natural development of OE earh instead.
athwart	thwares	There are some towns thwares the mountains.	From OE þweores. See across for alternatives.
awe	ey	The audience was filled with ey at the performance.	Rhymes with clay. Awesome is thus eysome.
awful	dreadful	Your singing is dreadful.	
awkward	unhandy	This machine is unhandy to work with.	
awn	ail	This grass has rather long ails.	From ME eile.
axle, axletree	ax(tree)	Any vehicle with wheels uses an ax(tree).	From native cognate and ME ax-tre.
bag	sack	I put all the goods in my sack.	
bait	eace	Spread the eace carefully.	
ban (verb)	forbid	I was forbidden from going to the bar.	Ban meant summon in OE. Meaning of forbid likely from Norse.
ban (noun)	forbode	There has been a forbode on certain flights.	Archaic word.
band (as in binding)	bend	They put a bend around his wrist to keep him from escaping.	From ME bende. Note that band meaning strip is from French.
bank	stath	I see something lying on the stream's stath.	From OE stæþ.
bark (as in tree bark)	rind	Help me remove the rind of this tree.	
bask	bathe	I bathed in the sun's warmth.	Bask may be from Norse baðask, but the MED rejects this etymology.
bat (as in the animal)	reremouse	I saw some reremice in a nearby cave.	Bat is likely an alteration of ME bakke.
batten (as in fatten)	fatten	Those devious merchants fatten on the poor.	
below	beneath	What lies beneath us?	
big	great	Which continent is the greatest?	Big may be of Norse root and tied to Norwegian dialect bugge.
One can also use much in its obsolete meaning.
billow (as in wave)	wave	The great waves swallowed the ship.	One can say great wave to emphasize the greatness.
billow (as in large mass)	wave	A wave of smoke came out of the chimney.	
billow (as in move as if blown by a wave)	wave	The flags were waving in the breeze.	
billow (as in fill with air and swell out)	swell out	The wind caused her dress to swell out.	
birth	bird	Today is the king's birdday.	From OE cognate.
blackmail	blackgavel	This is an exciting tale of blackgavel and secrecy.	Based on the ME phrase blak rent. Gavel a native word for rent, tribute.
bleak	bloak	The scenery here looks utterly bloak.	From OE cognate.
blend	minge	Minge all the ingredients.	From ME mengen. Blend probably from Norse blanda (present-tense stem blend).
OE geblende (glossed as Latin infecit) may suggest an OE weak verb geblendan meaning mix.
bloom (as in flower)	blossom	The roses have blossomed.	
blunt (as in dull)	dull	The tip of the ax was doul.	Blunt may have come from Norse.
Or: doul (from OE dol, rhymes with bowl). The vowel in dull suggests that it may have come from OE *dyl.
The verb should be make dull.
blunt (as in candid)	forthright	The critic made many forthright statements in his work.	
boatswain	boatsman	I was to work as this ship's boatsman.	Meaning narrowed here.
bole (as in tree trunk)	stock	Something was hiding behind the stock of the oak.	
bond (noun)	bend	The knight destroyed the man's bends with his sword.	From ME bende. Binding may also be used.
bond (verb)	bind	Bind the rods with the given material.	In some uses, a paraphrase like make a binding may work instead.
boon	been	The new technology has proven to be a been to many industries.	From native cognate. Rhymes with keen.
booth	stall	Buy two tickets at the nearby stall.	
bore (as in tidal bore)	head	The tide head came swiftly down the river.	
bosky	wooded	An old man lives in a house by a wooded hill.	Bosk (a variant of bush) apparently from Norse or Old French.
boulder	greatstone	We could not go forth, for a greatstone blocked our path.	
bound (as in bound for)	heading	This train is heading for London.	
both	bo	Bo his works are novels.	From ME bo. Rhymes with slow.
Some trace both to Norse báþir, whereas others trace it to the rare OE phrase bā þā (formed the same way as Dutch and German beide).
brink	edge	The country was on the edge of destruction.	An alternative is rim.
broadcast (as in sow over a broad area)	sow broadly	Help me sow the seeds broadly.	
broadcast (in other senses)	send out	The show will be sent out live.	Calque of Dutch uitzenden. Noun: sendout. Adjective: sent-out.
bulk (as in size, mass)	greatness	The greatness of the luggage tired me out.	
bulk (as in majority)	greater deal	The greater deal of the traffic is gone.	
bulk (as in bulk large)	bear weight	The land's resources bore weight in negotiations.	
bulk (as in make great)	greaten	This meal can be greatened with chicken.	
bulky	overgreat	I was forced to bear an overgreat bag.	
bull	far	Do you know the difference between cows and fars?	From OE fearr.
Bull may be from unattested OE bulla, suggested by OE bulluc (bullock).
bush	shrub	A shrub is smaller than a tree.	Probably from a variant of a Norse word.
Bush is sometimes said to be from OE busc (found only in placenames).
calf (as in part of leg)	sparlire	I pulled a muscle in my sparlire.	From ME sparlire
call	cleap	I clept out to the man.	PST and PTCP: clept.
call (as in telephone)	ring	I rang her yesterday, but she didn't pick up.	
cake	kitch	Kitch is better than pie.	Shortened form of ME kichel (small cake).
carp (as in complain)	gripe	I wish not to gripe about trivial matters.	
cart	crat	I used a shopping crat to stow my goods.	From OE cognate.
cast (as in throw)	throw	Let him who is without sin throw the first stone.	Also used for cast a glance.
cast (as in cast metal)	yeet	One can yeet bronze to make tools.	From ME yeten. PST: yote, PTCP: yoten.
cast (as in cast a vote)	stell in	Have you stelled in your vote yet?	From ME stellen. Put can be used, though evidence of its OE forebear is scarce.
cast (as in cast a spell)	utter	The witch uttered a spell on me.	Utter is partly of Middle Dutch origin.
cast (as in object made by casting)	yetling	Bronze yetlings were strewn through the room.	The meaning has been broadened here, so it can refer to any object.
cast (as in mold used for casting)	yeetle	The model was made with a special yeetle.	Yeet + -le (suffix showing instrumentality).
cast (as in group of actors)	team	Which actors are in this film's team?	For film crew, we can use film staff.
cast (as in assign a part in a production)	stell in	The actress was stelled in the film as a dancer.	
cast (as in medical cast)	forbinding	I had to walk around in a forbinding for a while.	Derivative of ME forbinden given a specialized meaning here.
A plaster cast is thus a plaster forbinding.
castaway	shipbritchling	The shipbritchling wandered around the island for shelter.	Calque of Dutch schipbreukeling. Britch is from ME briche and is the native form of breach, which is from Old French).
clip (as in cut)	shear	The angel's wings were shorn off.	
clip (as in graze)	shave	The truck nearly shaved my car.	
club (as in the weapon)	cudgel	He tried to strike me with his cudgel.	
club (as in association)	forone	Will you join the sports forone?	Calque of German Verein.
cog (as in tooth of a wheel)	tooth	This wheel's teeth are wooden.	
cog (as in gear)	toothwheel	There are many toothwheels inside this clock.	Based on Dutch tandwiel and German Zahnrad.
cow (as in intimidate)	browbeat	He was browbeaten into silence.	The verb cow probably from a Norse word.
cower	cringe	He cringed behind the barricade at the first sign of danger.	Cower may be from Middle Low German instead.
coxswain	steersman	This crew is missing a steersman.	
crawl	smow	I slowly smowed to the door.	From ME smūʒen. Rhymes with now.
crook (as in bend)	bend	The witch bent her finger.	
crook (as in staff)	staff	The shepherd used his staff to tend his sheep.	
crook (as in dishonest person)	swike	The politician said that he was not a swike.	From ME swike.
crooked (as in bent)	bent	The man did not want to show his bent teeth.	
crooked (as in dishonest)	swikle	Many people think that politicians are swikle.	Based on OE swicol.
cross (as in crucifix)	rood	Jesus was nailed to a rood.	We can have rood be a verb meaning intersect as well.
cross (as in go across a place)	overfare	Walk slowly as you overfare the street.	
cross (as in cross over)	overfare	It is hard to overfare to another field of work.	We can also use this for the noun crossover.
cross (as in oppose)	withstand	How dare you withstand me?	
cross (as in angry)	wroth	Be careful. James looks wroth right now.	
crosswise	roodwise	The food was sliced roodwise.	
cut	snithe	I snithed the apple into several pieces.	From dialectal word. Cut may actually be from an unattested OE word, according to the MED.
Dane	Dennishman	A few Dennishmen came one day to visit me.	Or: Denchman. Formed like Englishman and Frenchman.
Danish	Dennish	I cannot understand a word of Dennish.	Or: Dench (from ME dench)
dash (as in rush)	braid	Upon hearing the news, I braided to the castle.	Original meaning of braid.
Dash may be from a variant of a Norse word (seen in Danish daske) or an imitative word.
dash (as in throw)	throw	I threw the bottle against the wall.	
dash (as in spatter)	springe	Water was springed all over me.	From ME sprengen.
dash (as in shatter)	forbreak	The news forbroke the merchant's hopes.	From ME forbreken.
dash (as in discourage)	sadden	I do not wish to tell him, since I would only sadden him.	
dash (as in small amount)	drop	Life here came with a drop of sophistication.	
dash (as in horizontal stroke)	spit	I forgot to use spits in this sentence.	From obsolete sense.
dawn	dawing	I chose to wait here until dawing.	The verb is daw, from OE dagian.
Dawning (alteration of dawing) is unattested in OE and may be due to influence of a Norse word, but perhaps dawing was altered by analogy with the native words morning and evening.
daze	dweal	I felt dwealed after being struck on the head.	From ME dwelen.
die	swelt	Sam swelted last year in a car accident.	Now a dialectal verb. Related to swelter, a frequentative derivative.
Another native alternative is queal from OE cwelan (PST: quole, PTCP: quolen).
dirt (as in excrement)	drite	Unluckily, I stepped on drite.	Noun derived from ME driten.
Shit can be used, but is now uncouth.
dirt (as in earth)	earth	There is something in this handful of earth.	Adjectival form is earthen.
dirt (as in filth)	filth	I loathe being covered in filth.	Extends to figurative meanings such as gossip.
dove	culver	I saw a few culvers flying about.	Dove may be from unattested OE dūfe and may be tied to OE dūfedoppa.
down (feathers)	plumfeathers	This coat is made of plumfeathers.	From OE plūmfeþer (compare with German Flaumfeder). OE plūm appears to be a Latin borrowing (the source of plume, which entered English through Old French).
German also uses Daune, which is ultimately from Old Norse, and Dutch uses dons (which likely came from the same source), so English might have borrowed down from Norse anyway.
drag (as in draw)	draw	The horses will draw the carriage.	Some noun senses may be better conveyed with drawer.
drag (as in pass slowly)	draw out	The last part of the game simply drew itself out.	
drag (as in nuisance)	hinderer	His speech habits ended up being a hinderer.	
drag (as in bore)	dull thing	Work can be such a dull thing.	Instead of dull, one can use doul (from OE dol, rhymes with bowl). The vowel in dull suggests that it may have come from OE *dyl.
dragnet	drawnet	The fishermen here use drawnet.	Now a historical word.
dream	sweven	Last night, I had a weird sweven.	Rhymes with seven. Dream may be native, but simply unattested in OE.
dregs	drast	I drank the tea to the drast.	From ME drast.
droop	sink	As I grew weary, my eyelids sank.	The noun should be replaced with sinking.
drown	adrench	All but two of the crew adrenched in the storm.	From ME adrenchen. Drown perhaps from a variant of Norse drukkna.
dwell	abide	I have abided in this town for many years.	Old meaning of abide.
The meaning of reside is probably from Norse, since OE dwellan meant lead astray.
egg (verb)	goad	The throng goaded the man on.	
fast (as in abstention from food)	fasten	The monk held his fasten for seven days.	From ME fasten.
Fast may be from Norse or may simply be a shortening of fasten (akin to maiden → maid).
fellow	thoft	He went to the church with three of his thofts.	From OE geþofta.
ferry (verb)	fere	I fered the men by boat.	From OE ferian. Current form seems to have been from Norse.
ferry (noun)	fereboat	The fereboat is docked at the port right now.	Based on ferryboat.
filly	marefoal	I saw a marefoal running in the field.	Based on ME mare fole.
fir	furrowtree	I found shelter under a furrowtree.	Based on OE furh. The current form appears to be from Norse fyri (found in fyriskógr).
flat (as in level)	even	The boys found some even ground for their football match.	
flat (as in smooth)	smooth	The surface here is very smooth.	
flat (as in dull)	dull	The man spoke with a dull voice.	Or: doul (from OE dol, rhymes with bowl). The vowel in dull suggests that it may have come from OE *dyl.
flat (as in ruptured)	thirled	I need to fix my thirled tire later.	From ME thirlen (pierce).
flat (as in set)	set	The service charges a set fare.	
flat (as in absolute)	stark	He gave a stark denial to the accusation.	
flat (as in apartment)	flet	I moved to a flet a few years later.	Original form of the word.
flatfish	fadge	The other day, I caught a fadge.	From OE facg.
flaw (as in blemish)	wem	His scheme had a few wems.	From ME wem.
flaw, windflaw	windblast	I sensed that a windblast would soon come.	Flaw perhaps from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German instead.
fleet (as in swift)	swift	Watch out, for he is strong and swift.	The adjective may instead be a derivative of the native verb fleet.
fling (as in throw)	throw	I threw the stone at the river.	
fling (as in rush)	ferk	The moody man ferked out of the room.	From dialectal word. We can also use this for fling meaning period of enjoyment.
flit	fleet	Last night's events fleeted in my mind.	
freckle	splot	Her face has a few splots.	From OE splott and ME splotti. Meaning narrowed here.
froth (as in foam)	foam	The beer was foaming out of the cup.	
froth (as in nonsense)	drivel	All the drivel about entertainment is boring to listen to.	
fry (as in young salmon)	brood	The brood had just hatched.	
gait	way of walking	The man had a weird way of walking.	Stride is similar in meaning, but refers to long steps.
gap	break	There's a break in the records between 1980 and 1983.	Some senses may be better conveyed with britch (ME briche and the native form of breach, which is from Old French).
gape	goan	The cannonfire opened a goaning hole in the ship.	From ME gonen and apparently related to yawn.
The noun referring to the disease can now be the goans.
Yawn is often traced back to OE geonian or ginian, but its phonetic development is difficult to account for.
gasp	orthe	He orthed for breath after the race.	From OE orþian. Meaning narrowed here.
gear (as in cogwheel)	toothwheel	The toothwheels are turning.	Based on Dutch tandwiel and German Zahnrad.
geld	afire	The farmer had to afire the horse.	From OE afȳran.
gelding	afired	The afired won yet another competition.	Afired horse can be used to refer specifically to gelded horses.
get (as in obtain)	hole	Hole yourself a job.	From OE geholian. One can use this for obtain if one wants not to use yet (see get in the Palatalization section).
get (as in become)	become	It soon became cold.	One may also use archaic worth (PST: warth, PTCP: worthen).
get (as in understand)	understand	I'm sorry, teacher, but I still don't understand it.	
get (as in offspring)	offspring	What will the man pass on to his offspring?	
gift	yeft	What a wonderful birthday yeft!	From ME yeft, a later alteration of yift (< OE gift) based on the vowel in the verb yeave (see give).
gill (as in fish gill)	chy	A fish can breathe underwater thanks to its chies.	From OE cīan (plural).
gilt (as in young sow)	yelt	There are a few yelts for sale.	Now dialectal.
girth (as in band)	gird	I fastened the gird around the horse.	From OE gyrd.
girth (as in circumference)	umbgang	He is a man of average umbgang.	From OE ymbgang.
git	gadling	Leave this place at once, you gadling!	
glitter (noun)	spark	The spark of the jewels in the dark was pleasing to the eye.	
glitter (verb)	sparkle	The stars sparkled in the night sky.	
gosling	goosock	On my way to school, I saw some goosocks.	Goose + -ock.
guild	yield	It is hard to join the merchants' yield.	From ME yeld (< OE gegild).
This is the expected result from the Anglian form; the West Saxon form produced yild, which is attested in the OED as a dialectal form.
gust	blast	The beach was scoured by blasts of wind.	
hail (as in call out)	halse	The guards warmly halsed the visitor.	From ME halsen.
hail (as in praise)	loave	His approach has been loaved as groundbreaking.	From ME loven.
hail (as in hail from)	come	I come from England.	
happen	befall	What befell here last night?	PST: befell, PTCP: befallen.
happy	blithe	I like tales with blithe endings.	
harrow (tool)	eithe	The eithe is drawn by the tractor.	From ME eithe. Rhymes with bathe.
Harrow is possibly native; the MED traces it to unattested OE hearwe.
harrow (as in cause distress)	tray	This has been a rather traying experience.	From ME treien.
haven	harbor / harbour	The ship will leave the harbor / harbour tomorrow.	May be native, but is often said to be a borrowing.
hit	strike	She struck the table in frustration.	
hoarse	hose	He spoke with a hose voice.	From OE hās. Hoarse is sometimes said to be from unattested Norse hārs (variant of hāss), but the MED attributes it to an unattested OE variant hārs. The variant with r also appears in Middle Dutch.
hug	clip	The two lovers clipped upon seeing each other again.	Old meaning of clip meaning fasten.
husband (noun)	were	My were often goes to the bar.	Counterpart to wife. Found in werewolf. An alternative is man, though, while this is natural for a male human in standard English, the word man is often broadened to gender-neutral meaning of person in Anglish.
husband (verb)	speal	I want to speal my energy.	From ME spelen.
husbandry (as in farming)	earthtilth	The folk here practice animal earthtilth.	
husbandry (as in conservation)	spealing	He ought to be commended for his spealing.	
ill (as in sick)	sick	The man has recovered from his sickness.	
ill (as in hostile)	unkind	Many people had unkind feelings about the businessman.	
ill (as in poor)	arm	Because of his arm judgment, he has lost most of his wealth.	
ill (as in harmful)	harmful	Fortunately, this potion has no harmful effects.	
ill (as in ill afford)	hardly	I can hardly afford to pay for all this.	
ill (as in evil)	evil	I would never do him evil.	
keel (nautical)	bottom	Something struck the ship's bottom.	Note that keel as in keelboat appears to be from Middle Dutch.
keel (as in fall over)	fall over	A strong wind caused the boat to fall over.	
keg	vattock	He drank a whole vattock of beer.	From vat + -ock.
ken (as in beyond my ken)	knowledge	Something like that is beyond my knowledge.	
kick	spornet	I spornetted the ball with all my might.	From OE spornettan. Kick may be from Norse kikna.
kid (as in child)	child	You're only a child, so leave me alone.	We can use youngling as a more informal variant.
kid (as in young goat)	titch	The titch fled upon hearing a loud noise.	From ME tiche.
kid (as in joke)	tease	Don't worry, I'm only teasing.	The verb kid probably originally meant make a kid of.
kid (as in deceive)	peach	I cannot peach myself into believing that.	From OE pǣcan.
kid (as in give birth to a goat)	ean	When will the goats ean?	From ME enen.
An alternative is dialectal yean (said to be from unattested OE ge-ēanian).
kidnap	forsteal	The princess was forstolen last night.	From OE forstelan in its meaning of abduct.
kindle	light	Find some branches to light a fire.	
knife	sax	The man was stabbed with a sax.	Generally said to be a borrowing.
lapwing	lapwink	The lapwink is a common bird throughout Europe.	The form lapwing is due to folk etymology connecting lapwink with Norse wing.
law	ea	It is important to know what your country's eas are.	From ME e and OE ǣ.
leg	shank	The man's shanks were very hairy.	Shank referring to part of a leg is now footshank from OE fōtsceanca.
lift	heave	Could you help me heave this thing?	Some noun senses may be better shown with heaver.
likely	liefly	How liefly is it that the coin will land on heads?	From OE gelēaflic meaning credible.
ling (diminutive suffix)	ock	The townsfolk often go to that hillock.	Found in hillock. Pronounced /ək/.
linger	linge	I ended up lingeing at the inn for a few hours.	From ME lengen. The /g/ in linger is probably from Norse lengja.
link	tie	He is the weakest tie of the group.	
litmus	dyeraw	I used dyeraw paper in an experiment.	From dye and raw (from OE ragu meaning lichen), as litmus is gotten from lichens.
Etymologically, litmus is to dye + moss.
loan (noun)	lean	You shall pay back your lean soon.	From OE cognate.
loan (verb)	lend	The earl lent the man some of his money.	
loft (as in upper room)	sollar	Many things are stowed in my sollar.	From OE solor. Lived on in some dialects as sollar.
loft (verb)	rear	The ball was reared over the fence.	
lofty (as in elevated)	uphigh	She had very uphigh ideals in mind.	From OE uphēah. High works in many contexts as well.
lofty (as in haughty)	highmoody	You should drop your highmoody attitude.	From OE hēahmōd + -y.
loose	slack	Be careful, for the ropes are rather slack.	Loosen is then slacken.
low	nether	I live in the nether parts of this land.	Comparative is netherer or nethermore, and superlative netherest or nethermost.
lower (verb)	nether	I carefully nethered the statue.	ME netheren (which had the figurative sense of debase).
lug	heave	It was tiring heaving the sofa up the stairs.	
luggage	fareload	Could I help you bear your fareload?	Roughly based on German Reisegepäck.
marram grass	beachgrass	The sandhills were swathed in beachgrass.	
meek	sheepish	Tom always looked like a sheepish man.	
mire (as in swampy area)	slough	I lost my boots, after my feet became stuck in the slough.	Rhymes with plough.
mire (as in mud)	horrow	I drove my bicycle through horrow.	From ME horwe, variant of hore (one can use hore instead).
mire (as in difficult situation)	bind	I found myself to be in quite a bind.	
mire (verb)	tie up	The business was tied up in debts and lawsuits.	
muck (as in filth)	filth	Clean up that filth on the floor at once.	
muck (as in mud)	horrow	I fell on a puddle of horrow.	From ME horwe, variant of hore (one can use hore instead).
muck (as in dung)	dung	The farmer used dung as fertilizer.	
mug (as in large cup with a handle)	nap	I took a sip from my coffee nap.	From ME nap. Meaning narrowed here.
Mug is probably from a Norse word.
mug (as in face)	anlet	What an anlet that man has!	From ME anlet.
mug (as in fool)	halfwit	All those halfwits believe everything that I say.	
mug (as in attack to rob)	street-reave	Someone tried to street-reave me yesterday.	Based on German Straßenraub.
nay	no	If you disagree with me, say no.	Naysayer is now nosayer.
numbskull	thickhead	What are you thickheads dilly-dallying for?	
oaf	clot	Look what you have done, you clot!	Clod may also be used.
oar	rudder	The longship was propelled by twelve rudders on each side.	From obsolete sense. Oar is probably an early borrowing, according to the OED.
To refer to the steering rudder specifically, one can use steerrudder based on German Steuerruder.
odd (as in strange)	weird	He is such a weird man.	
odd (as in odd number)	uneven	How many uneven numbers are shown here?	
odd (as in fifty-odd)	ish	He has never seen something like this in fiftyish years.	
odd (as in occasional)	unoften	They had a few unoften moments together.	Here, the adverb has been turned into an adjective.
odd (as in remaining)	leftover	I do not wish to be the leftover man out.	
odd (as in mismatched)	mismatched	Why are you wearing mismatched socks?	
outcast	outthrown	He felt like an outthrown among them.	Adjective turned into a noun. Outsider can be used, but may have slightly different connotations.
outlaw (noun)	wolfshead	Many wolfsheads have been seen wandering nearby.	From the phrase wolf's head.
outlaw (verb)	forbid	The government has forbidden the use of this chemical.	
outskirt	outer edge	Many poor people live on the city's outer edges.	
perhaps	weeningly	She was weeningly the fairest of them all.	Based on OE wēnunga. Also used to replace archaic mayhap.
Maybe can be used, but generally only in front or end position.
plow / plough	sullow	The farmer's oxen drew the sullow.	Now a dialectal word.
OE plōg meant ploughland. Current meaning looks to be from Norse plógr.
race (as in racecar)	rease	This will be given to the winner of the rease.	From OE rǣs. Rhymes with fleece.
raft	float	The castaway built a float to escape the island.	
rag (as in old cloth)	tattick	I was bidden to wipe the floor with a mere tattick.	From OE tættec.
raise	rear	Rear your hand if you agree.	The noun should be rearing, but pay raise is now pay rise.
ransack	ripe	They riped the house looking for his money.	Now dialectal.
reindeer	roan	Rudolph is a red-nosed roan.	From OE cognate.
reskin	yeave a new hide	We yave the car a new hide.	The noun could be a new formation like newhide.
rid	red	I bid you to red me of those pests.	From ME redden.
Rid is often said to have come from Norse ryðja, but some OE attestations suggest that it may be from unattested OE ryddan.
rift (noun)	cleft	The quake opened a great cleft in the earth.	
rift (verb)	cleave	The clouds cleaved enough to let light through for a moment.	
rig (nautical)	shride	How many ships have been shrided with new sails?	From one meaning of ME shriden (clothe).
rig (as in arrange for operation)	dight	The stage was dighted with a new loudspeaker.	Now a literary word.
rig (as in construct hastily)	throw together	I quickly threw together a shelter.	
rig (as in clothe)	clothe	The soldiers were clothed in fresh green uniforms.	The noun is simply clothing.
rig (as in device)	set-up	There is something wrong with your set-up.	
rig (as in truck, lorry)	loadwain	A ton of loadwains were parked outside.	Based on German Lastwagen.
rive	rend	The political party is rent by ideological conflicts.	
root (as in tree root)	more	The love of money is the more of all evil.	
rotten	rotted	The apple is fully rotted.	Rot is from OE, but rotten is a borrowing.
rowan	quickbeam	The quickbeam's berries can be used in medicine.	
rump (as in hind part)	arse / ass	The arse / ass of the cow provides good meat.	A less uncouth alternative is buttocks.
rump (as in remnant)	beliving	The beliving of the party waited for its chance.	Formed from ME biliven. Rhymes with driving.
rug (as in floor covering)	footsheet	Your footsheet has a beautiful Eastern design.	From ME fot-shete. Rug is probably from a Norse word.
rug (as in blanket)	strail	I set the strail on my lap.	From ME strail.
rune	rown	There are rowns carved on this old helmet.	From native cognate. Rhymes with down.
sale	selling	How many sellings have you made so far?	
same	ilk	I am of the ilk profession as Sam is.	Modern ilk is a misinterpretation of the word in Scottish use.
scalp (noun)	headhide	I put shampoo on my headhide.	Based on German Kopfhaut. Scalp is likely Norse.
scalp (as in take the scalp of)	nim headhide	The tribesman nam the invaders' headhides.	
scalp (as in resell)	edsell	Some people were trying to edsell tickets.	Ed- is a native equivalent of re-.
scant, scanty	geason	Evidence for his theory is rather geason.	From dialectal word.
scant (verb)	stint	You must not stint on the details.	
scare (noun)	fright	There has been a recent fright over food.	
scare (verb)	frighten	The children are frightened by the dark.	
scatter	strew	The papers were strewn all over the floor.	Scatter is possibly from an unattested OE word that may be the source of shatter, with the initial consonant influenced by Norse words beginning with /sk/.
scold	chide	The teacher chided the children for breaking the rules.	Scold is likely from Norse. The noun would be chider.
score (as in twenty)	twenty	I saw twenty knights standing before the castle.	
score (as in total points)	stand	What is the current stand for the game?	Based on Dutch stand. Standing has a slightly broader meaning in sports.
score (as in gain a point)	win	I barely managed to win a few points.	
score (as in decide a score)	deem	A good judge deems each participant fairly.	
scrap	shred	Only a few shreds of paper remain after the library was ransacked.	
scree	slithers	Be mindful of the slithers on that part of the mountain.	From dialectal word.
scrub (as in vegetation)	undergrowth	I see nothing but a lot of undergrowth.	Variant of shrub probably influenced by Norse.
The attributive should be replaced with undergrown.
seat	sess	I'm sorry, but this sess is reserved.	From OE sess. An alternative is sield from ME selde.
seem	look	From what I can tell, everything looks to be all right.	
seemly	becoming	That suit does not look becoming on you.	
sheer	shire	Your words are nothing but shire nonsense.	According to the MED, sheer is a mix of Norse skere and native shire (unrelated to shire meaning county).
The OED also suggests that it may be from unattested OE scǣre.
sister	suster	I have two susters.	From ME variant.
skep	hive	A specially made hive is shown on the shelf.	
skin (noun)	hide	There is a spider crawling on my hide.	Fell can be used to refer specifically to animal skin.
skin (as in remove skin)	flay	Carefully flay the swine.	
skin (as in scrape)	shrape	It must have been painful when you shraped your knee.	
skin (as in become covered with skin)	grow new hide	Your wound will soon grow new hide.	
skin (as in cover with skin)	yeave hide	Yeave hide to the wound.	
skin (as in swindle)	fleece	Are you trying to fleece me?	
skinny (as in very thin)	mair	You look mair in that dress.	From OE mæger. Lean and thin can be used, but with different connotations.
skirt (as in the clothing)	gore	The lady's gore was pretty to look at.	Meaning taken from ME. Unrelated to gore meaning bloodshed.
skirt (as in edge)	edge	There is a house on the forest's edges.	
skirt (as in go around)	go about	He chose to go about the city.	
skirt (as in lie along an edge)	edge	There are some trees that edge the river.	
skirt (as in avoid)	forbow	You must not forbow the issue any longer.	From OE forbūgan. Rhymes with now.
skill	craft	Cooking requires much craft.	
skilled	crafty	Alfred is very crafty in cooking.	
skulk (as in hide)	mithe	I sense that someone is mithing behind that tree.	From OE mīþan meaning hide.
We can also convert mithe to a noun meaning group of foxes.
skulk (as in avoid duty)	mithe	There will be no mithing allowed in this workplace.	Meaning also extended here.
skulk (as in move steathily)	slink	The fox slunk through the forest.	
skull	headbone	Pirates' flags often show headbones.	From OE hēafodbān. Skull is probably from a Norse word.
Brainpan may be used as well, especially to refer to the braincase.
sky	heaven	A bright blue heaven stretched above us.	
slaughter (noun)	slaught	He was found guilty of manslaught.	Found in onslaught.
slaughter (verb)	slay	Many innocents were slain in the war.	
slaver (as in slobber)	drivel	The boy was driveling in his sleep.	Original meaning of drivel. Slaver possibly from Middle Low German.
Drool can be used, but is of uncertain root (often said to be an alteration of drivel).
sleight	cunning	I tricked the man with cunning of hand.	
sleuth (as in sleuthhound)	hawkshaw	Victorian fiction features many different hawkshaws.	The surname Hawkshaw is of Anglo-Saxon root.
Sleuth as in slowness is unrelated and is a native formation.
slight (as in small)	small	I gave it a small kick.	Slight said to be from Norse sléttr, but perhaps it is instead from OE sliht, attested only in eorþ-slihtes (level with the ground).
slight (as in slender)	lithe	I could not stop beholding her lithe figure.	
slight (as in insult)	belittle	I accidentally belittled my host by not acting properly.	The noun should be belittling.
slightly (as in a little)	a little	The man was a little standoffish.	
sling (as in throw)	throw	I threw a few things into my backpack.	
sling (as in hang)	hang	I shall hang a blanket between those two trees.	
sling, slingshot	lither	The man was attacked with a lither.	From ME lither. Rhymes with slither. Sling may be from Middle Low German.
slug (animal)	dewsnail	He moves as slowly as a dewsnail.	From dialectal word. Slug is probably from a Norse word.
sly	cunning	Foxes are generally thought to be cunning animals.	
smile	smark	I smarked upon seeing her.	Based on the OE variant smearcian. OE smercian became smirk, which now has a negative connotation.
ME had underlaughen, probably a calque of Latin subrīdeō.
smithy	smithhouse	I went to the smithhouse to place an order.	From ME smethous.
snare (as in trap)	grin	I have set up a few grins on the field.	Now a dialectal word.
snipe	snite	The hunter has gone out to hunt some snites.	We can then translate sniper as sniter.
sound (as in strait)	narrow	The ship sailed through the narrow.	Apparently a loanword, according to the OED.
The native OE cognate sund meant swimming, sea.
spoon (eating utensil)	metstick	I ate my soup with a metstick.	Based on OE metesticca.
The meaning of eating utensil is apparently from Norse, as OE spōn meant only chip, though the Middle Low German cognate also meant wooden spatula.
stack	rick	The thief leapt into the hayrick.	
steak	rand	The dad put a juicy rand on the grill.	Now a dialectal word meaning strip of meat.
stem (as in restrict)	astint	I must astint the bleeding at once.	From ME astinten.
stern (nautical)	aft	The captain stood at the aft.	
stoup	steap	I dipped my hands in the steap.	From OE cognate.
swain	wooer	The wooer won the lady's heart.	
sway (as in move slowly)	waw	The wind made the trees waw.	From ME wawen.
sway (as in rule)	stightle	Who will stightle the kingdom in my stead?	From ME stightelen.
take	nim	Let me nim that off your hands.	PST: nam, PTCP: num.
Note that the past participle became numb as an adjective after the basic verb fell out of use. To replace the verb (be)numb, one can use deaden, and to replace the adjective numb and (be)numbed, one can use dead or deadened.
tatter	tattick	I saw a man wearing tatticked clothes.	From OE tættec.
teem (as in pour down)	yeet	The rain began to yeet down on us.	From ME yeten. PST: yote, PTCP: yoten.
tern	seaswallow	A seaswallow flew down from the cliff.	
tether (noun)	sole	The cow lies down by its sole.	From OE sāl.
tether (verb)	seal	The man sealed his horse to a nearby tree.	From OE sǣlan.
though	thaugh	Thaugh it is dark, I do not feel afraid at all.	Based on an ME variant. This should probably rhyme with laugh, based on the development of laugh.
thrall	thew	The man became a thew to his desires.	Enthrall may be something like bethew.
thrift	spealing	Spealing is a quality that men ought to have.	Based on speal.
thrifty	spealsome	It is good to be spealsome with one's money.	Based on German sparsam.
thrive	thee	Because of its mines, the country has continued to thee greatly.	The verb thee is pronounced /θi/.
Past tense: thow (rhyming with grow), past participle: thown. The verb appears to have been consistently conjugated as a strong verb in Middle English, whence the irregular inflections.
thrust	shove	The man had shoved his hands into the bag.	
Thursday	Thundersday	I shall leave this Thundersday.	From OE þunresdæg. Later forms may have been influenced by Norse þōrsdagr.
thwart (as in prevent)	stop	The knight managed to stop the evil wizard.	
thwart (as in bench of a boat)	thoft	This boat has three thofts.	Dialectal word.
tidings	news	Fear not, friend, for I bring good news.	Tidings likely based on Norse tíðendi, but one could derive tiding from the obsolete native verb tide (happen).
till, until	oth	He waited in the park oth midnight.	From ME oth.
tight	fast	The ropes are a little too fast.	Fast means firm, tight, secure here. Tighten is then fasten.
tit, titmouse	mose	I could hear a mose chirping outside.	From ME mose. Rhymes with hose. Tit in titmouse appears to be from Norse.
to and fro	back and forth	It's tiresome to walk back and forth	The native variant to and from is attested in ME.
trust	trow	For now, I will trow you.	Archaic word. Rhymes with know.
There is reason to doubt that trust is a Norse borrowing. As mentioned in the OED, tracing this to Norse traustr presents phonological difficulties, whereas tracing this to OE *trust and *trystan would better explain the vocalism in attested ME forms. Moreover, the word is earliest attested in works whose dialects do not show strong Norse influence, which makes a native origin likelier.
One explanation for the vocalism in ME trust-tristen is analogy with umlauted pairs such as lust-list (an archaic verb meaning want, desire), with tristen (traced to Norse treysta, which is also the source of ME traisten) acting as the basis for analogy. However, such an explanation seems unlikely, since umlaut had already become unproductive, and analogical umlaut formations have seldom been made.
trusty	trowful	I rode on my horse, my trowful steed.	Based on OE getrēowfull.
tug	tee	The girl kept teeing on my sleeve.	From ME ten. Tug is apparently related to Old English tugon and togen, but these inflections had /ɣ/, not /g/, as shown by their later history. Tug is probably instead related to Norse toga.
Past tense: tow (rhyming with grow), past participle: town. The verb appears to have been consistently conjugated as a strong verb in Middle English, whence the irregular inflections.
ugly	unsightly	He had a rather unsightly appearance.	
unto	to	Do to others as you would have them do to you.	
Viking	Witching	The village was attacked by the Witchings.	From the OE form of the word.
wand	rod	Begin the spell with your magical rod.	
want (as in desire)	list	I list to rest right now.	Archaic word.
want (as in lack)	gead	This house is in gead of repair.	From OE gǣd.
weak	woak	He is woak both physically and mentally.	From OE wāc. Weaken and weakling are then woaken and woakling.
wheeze	snast	The woman could not stop snasting.	From ME fnasten, with change of fn to sn (as seen in sneeze). Meaning extended here.
whir	drone	I heard a helicopter droning in the air.	
whirl	wharftle	I wharftled around upon hearing a strange noise.	From OE hwearftlian.
wholesale (noun)	wholeselling	I work at a wholeselling business.	The verb should be sell wholly.
The adverb can be something like by wholeselling.
wholesale (as in on a large scale)	widespread	The war brought widespread destruction upon the land.	The adverb should be widely.
window	eyethirl	The glass eyethirl was broken for some reason.	From ME ei-thirl.
wing	flile	I wondered at the magical bird's fliles.	Fly + -le. Calque of German Flügel.
The native word was OE fiþere, but it later merged with OE feþer (feather).
workaday	everyday	You should not wear such everyday clothes.	Said by some to have come from Norse virkr dagr, but others say that it is instead an alteration of workday by analogy with words like holiday.
wrong	wough	Your answer to the question is wough.	Rhymes with now.
yowl	thout	Once I stepped on the cat's tail, it thouted.	From ME thuten, variant of theoten (one can use theet instead).
Yowl is sometimes traced to Norse gaula, perhaps influenced by yell, but it may be simply an imitative word.
Yule	Yeel	It's the Yeeltide season!	From OE gēol.
Though Yule could be derived through stress shift in the diphthong, the fact that the word almost always shows the yo- variant in Middle English (with hardly any trace of the ye- variant) and is mainly used in Northern and East Midlands texts shows that Yule was most likely borrowed from Norse jól.
