French word	English word	Example sentence	Notes
abandon (verb)	forsake	The man forsook many of his former ideals.	Past tense: forsook, past participle: forsaken.
abandon (noun)	wantonness	The children played around with wild wantonness.	
abbacy	abbotship	The monk succeeded to the abbotship.	
abbess	abboten	The abboten welcomed the visitor to the abbey.	See -ess.
abbey	abbotric	The abbotric's members grew their own food.	Based on the obsolete word abbotric.
Or: abbotrich, with substitution of Norse-influenced -ric with native -rich.
able	findy	He was a very findy worker.	From ME findi (meaning apt, capable). Rhymes with windy.
Extended here to mean having the ability.
For enable (a later formation), we can use befindy (a newly formed derivative).
acquaint	kith	I am not kithed with that old man.	From ME kitthen.
acquaintance	kith	He is a dear kith of mine.	Now found only in the phrase kith and kin.
afraid	afeared	Children are often afeared of the dark.	Now a dialectal word. The past participle of afear (frighten), like how afraid is etymologically the past participle of the archaic verb affray.
age	eld	Charles was crowned king at the eld of 74.	Now an obsolete word. Also used as a verb with the same meaning as age (from ME elden).
air (as in the gas)	lift	I opened the window to let in some fresh lift.	Now a dialectal word. Akin to loft and normal lift, both of which are Norse borrowings.
We can extend this to be a verb meaning let fresh air in.
Air meaning melody appears to be a translation of Italian aria. As this is part of musical terminology, which is mainly Italian, one can borrow right from Italian and use aria.
Aerial is a later Latin borrowing and is now liftly.
For air meaning transmit on radio or television, one can use broadcast (which uses a Norse borrowing) or send out (verb) and sendout (noun).
air (as in feeling)	lift	I wanted this to have a lift of sophistication.	Air meaning feeling, atmosphere may be from a later French borrowing ultimately from Latin ager, but it may also be an extension of the regular meaning of air (as shown in the development of spirit and atmosphere), in which case we can extend lift for this use.
For put on airs, one can use a phrase such as lord it over others.
almond	amidal	Do you want to eat some amidals?	From OE amigdal (borrowed from Latin amygdalum). Pronounced /ˈæmɪdəl/.
Note that g in the OE form would have disappeared after i from natural sound changes (compare with the phonetic development of OE nigon > NE nine).
angel	ingel	One night, an ingel suddenly appeared before me.	From OE engel. Pronounced /ˈɪndʒəl/.
Or: ingle (rhyming with single, with /g/ generalized from certain OE inflections such as englas).
Angel is from the Old French form aungel.
angelic	ingelish	She had such an ingelish face.	Or: ingelly.
animal	deer	Cats and dogs are both deer.	From the word's original meaning.
Animal is also considered a Latin loanword.
The current specialized meaning of deer could be found contextually in OE, but the word was generally used to mean animal. The word began to lose its general meaning in Middle English because of French influence, as it was replaced with beast, which was later replaced with animal.
To refer to the four-legged creature, one can use hart, the original word for deer.
annual	yearly	The festival is a yearly event.	
apart (as in separated)	asunder	How far asunder should those two be?	
apart (as in into pieces)	asunder	The machine suddenly fell asunder.	
apart (as in aside)	aside	All joking aside, what is your next move?	
appease	befrith	The king managed to befrith his neighbor.	Based on ME frithen and German befriedigen. See peace.
Obsolete variant of appease: pease.
appeasement	befrithing	All attempts at befrithing soon came to an end.	
appraise	aloave	The painting will soon be aloaved.	From OE gelofian, with change in prefix.
Obsolete variant of appraise: apprize.
archer	bowman	How many bowmen are out in the field?	The feminine is bowwoman.
archery	bowmanship	He practices his bowmanship every day.	
arm (as in weapon)	weapon	The rebels picked up their weapons.	Extended here to mean coat of arms.
Firearm is now fireweapon (an attested compound).
arm (as in supply with weapons)	weapon	We must weapon ourselves to prepare for danger.	Now a rare use of the word as a verb.
army	hear	He decided to join the hear when the war began.	From ME here. Rhymes with bear. Also used figuratively.
arrival	lending	I have been expecting your lending for some time.	See arrive.
arrive	lend	By the time the storm passes, we will have already lent at Rome.	Now an obsolete word.
art	craft	The craft of conversation is hard to master.	Some uses of craft that refer to more manual activity may be better shown with handicraft or handiwork, so arts and crafts can be replaced with something like crafts and handiworks.
Artful is now crafty (in the meaning of guileful) or craftful (in the meaning of skilled).
Artless is now uncrafty (in the meaning of guileless) or craftless (in the meaning of unskilled).
artifice (as in guile)	craftiness	The story is full of action and craftiness.	Craft or cunning also works.
artifice (as in artful trick)	crafty prat	He used many crafty prats to gain influence.	Prat is now a dialectal word meaning trick.
artificial	craftly	Her laugh sounded quite craftly.	From ME craftli (with the meaning of skillful). Meaning extended here. Compare with German künstlich.
In some contexts, manmade also works.
artisan	craftsman	The craftsmen were busy at work in the workshop.	Artisanal is a later formation and is now craftsmanly.
artist	crafter	Picasso was a famous crafter.	Meaning broadened here to refer to someone of the fine arts. Compare with German Künstler.
Artistic is a later formation and is now crafterish (compare with German künstlerisch).
aunt	modry	Go help your dear modry out.	From ME moddrie (originally meaning maternal aunt).
autumn	fall	Fall comes before winter.	The adjectival form, autumnal, is a later borrowing from Latin and is translated as fallish.
avenge	wreak	I must wreak my father by capturing his murderer.	From an old use of wreak.
await	abide	I am anxiously abiding my test results.	From an old use of abide.
bacon	spitch	For breakfast, he had spitch and eggs.	From ME spich.
banish	fordrive	The king fordrove him from the country for his treason.	From ME fordriven.
Banishment is a later formation and is now fordriving.
banner	cumble	The guard waved the king's cumble.	From OE cumbol.
baptise, baptize	fullow	He was fullowed as an infant.	Now an obsolete word.
baptism	fullought	This water will be used for the fullought.	From ME fulloght. Ought here rhymes with drought.
baptist	fulloughter	Hast thou heard of John the Fulloughter?	From ME fulluhtere.
Or: fullower (see baptize).
baptistery, baptistry	fulloughtstow	The fulloughtstow was in that part of the church.	From OE fullwihtstōw. Stow here rhymes with flow.
baron	thane	The king gathered a council of thanes.	Thane referred to a certain kind of nobleman in Anglo-Saxon England and is used here as a native equivalent of baron (compare with the use of earl for count in the British peerage).
For the feminine, see baroness.
Baron is a common Germanic borrowing.
baronage, barony	thanedom	The men were driven out of the thanedom.	
baroness	thanen	The thanen managed to get her husband to listen.	See -ess.
Baroness is a common Germanic borrowing.
If one is willing to borrow baron, one can use baronen (a newly formed derivative).
beast (as in animal)	deer	Oxen are deer of burden.	See animal.
Bestiary is a later Latin borrowing and is now deerbook.
beast (as in brute)	wildling	He's nothing more than a filthy wildling.	Extended here to its figurative uses.
beauty	sheenness	There was no man who was not entranced by her sheenness.	From the old adjective sheen.
Beautiful is thus sheen.
beef (food)	rotherflesh	He enjoys eating rotherflesh.	Based on dialectal rother meaning bovine.
Or: rothermeat.
Can be shortened to: rother.
beef (as in bovine)	rother	How many rothers do you own?	
beef (as in muscular brawn)	flesh	You need some more flesh in your body!	Or: meat.
beef (as in complaint)	gripe	What's his gripe with me?	
beef (as in complain)	gripe	What are you griping about now?	
beg	weedle	The vagrant was weedling for money.	From ME wedlen.
Beg is sometimes traced to OE bedecian (attested twice), but the OE word was rare, and it would not have yielded beg under normal sound changes, which makes the OE word an unlikely source. A more plausible source is Anglo-French begger, which fits semantically and phonetically.
belfry	belltor	The assistant ran to the belltor and rang the bell.	Based on bell tower. Tor is from OE torr.
Or: bellroom (if referring to the part of a bell tower where the bell is hung).
blame (noun)	wite	You simply cannot lay all the wite on her.	Now a dialectal word.
blame (verb)	wite	He wited me for the incident.	Now a dialectal word.
boil	seethe	The first step is to seethe the water.	From the word's original meaning. Also used in its figurative uses, e.g., he was boiling with anger > he was seething with anger.
Extended here to have the same meanings as the noun boil, e.g., the water comes to a boil > the water comes to a seethe.
Boiler is now seether.
For boil (as in inflamed swelling), the word is native (OE bȳl), but bile, the expected modern form and now a dialectal variant, was later altered to boil apparently from association with the French word, so the word to replace boil for inflamed swelling is bile.
bracelet	bigh	He wore a golden bigh.	From ME begh.
breach	britch	I had to go fix the britch in the wall.	From ME briche (< OE bryce). The modern form shows influence from French breche.
Extended here to be a verb.
burglar	housebreaker	According to the witness, the housebreaker fled after hearing the siren ring.	Burgle and burglarize are later formations and can be translated as something like break into houses.
burglary	housebreaking	The man was sentenced for housebreaking.	Or: housebritch (based on OE hūsbryċe; note that breach is French).
butcher (noun)	flesher	I went to the local flesher to buy some flesh.	From an old use of the word.
For its figurative meaning of murderer, one can also use slayer or slaughterer (as slaughter is from Norse).
butcher (as in kill)	slay	The animals were rounded up to be slain later.	Or: slaughter (which is from Norse).
butcher (as in botch, ruin)	mishandle	Unfortunately, the director mishandled the ending.	
butler (as in manservant in charge of wine)	birler	The host asked the birler to pour out drinks.	From ME birler.
butler (as in chief manservant)	housesteward	I have hired a housesteward to manage the mansion.	Steward by itself can also work.
camel	olvend	He rode an olvend through the desert.	From ME olvende.
Camel is attested in late Old English, but became the usual word for the animal from influence of the French and Latin word.
Other Germanic languages except Icelandic have borrowed the Latin word for this.
canon (as in clergyman)	canonic	The canonic was asked to watch over him.	From OE canonic, a Latin borrowing.
captain	headling	The sailors obeyed their headling's orders.	From ME hevedling (meaning chief, leader).
Other words may work for this such as shiplord for sea captain.
car	wain	I parked my wain in my garage.	Now an archaic word and the native word for wagon. Meaning extended to refer to modern cars.
carpenter	timberwright	He wanted to work as a timberwright.	From ME timber-wright. Extended here to be a verb of the same meaning.
carpentry	timberwork	The timberwork of this building is impressive.	
carriage (as in act of carrying)	bearing	Will you pay for the bearing of these goods?	
carriage (as in behavior, conduct)	bearing	Her bearing showed much grace.	
carriage (as in component that supports a moving part)	bearing	Check the bearing of this machine.	
carriage (as in wagon, vehicle)	wain	In the past, people traveled around in wains drawn by horses.	Now an archaic word and the native word for wagon.
For horse-drawn carriages in particular, one can use a phrase like horse-drawn wain or the compound horsewain (which is attested).
carry (as in support and move)	bear	The truck bore the goods to the harbor.	
carry (as in wear or have on one's person)	bear	Police officers usually bear guns.	
carry (as in have as a feature or consequence)	bear	Hunting bears with it many risks.	
carry (as in support the weight of)	bear	The bridge can bear tons of traffic.	
carry (as in be pregnant with)	bear	She now bears a child in her womb.	
carry (as in accept, assume)	bear	You must bear the consequences of your choices.	
carry (as in behave)	bear	She needs to bear herself with grace.	
carry (as in travel in a certain distance)	bear	The player's kick bore several yards.	
carry (as in act of carrying)	bearing	The bearing of the crates took a while.	
castle	fasten	The fasten was such a beautiful place to look around.	From OE fæsten. The OE word castel meant town, village, and the meaning of fortification is from the French word.
cattle	neat	The herdsmen were told to drive all the neat.	Now an archaic word.
Note that a cattle herder is called a neatherd.
An individual cattle animal is a neat or a rother (now a dialectal word).
cause (as in source, origin)	inting	What is the inting of his sickness?	From OE intinga. Rhymes with hinting.
One can also use orsake, a calque of German Ursache. The stress is on the first syllable.
Because is a later formation, and one way to translate it is forthat (based on the archaic phrase for that). Other words include since and as.
For because of, one way to translate it is along of (now a dialectal phrase and unrelated to the usual word along). Another way is owing to.
Causal is a later Latin borrowing and is now intingly or orsakely.
cause (as in purpose, ideal)	sake	I work for the sake of bettering mankind.	
cause (as in matter, dispute)	sake	The two parties took their sake to the judge.	From an old use of sake.
cause (verb)	inting	What intinged the earthquake?	Extension of inting to be a verb.
One can also extend orsake to be a verb, e.g., I caused the fire > I orsaked the fire. The stress is on the first syllable.
cease	blin	He never blins to amaze me.	Now an obsolete word. Past tense: blan, past participle: blun.
In many cases, stop works as well, e.g., cease that racket > stop that racket.
cedar	cheader	She went to take a look at the cheader tree.	From OE ceder (a borrowing from Latin).
celestial	heavenly	I looked at the heavenly body through my telescope.	
cent	penny	This item costs one penny, but that one costs ten pence.	The plural is pence when used for amounts, but pennies when used for individual coins.
certain (as in sure)	sicker	I am sicker that he is wrong about this one.	Now a dialectal word.
certain (as in unspecified)	sicker	A sicker man once said that a fool and his money are soon parted.	Meaning extended here. Compare with Dutch zeker, which means certain in both uses.
certain (pronoun)	some	I have read some of his works.	
certainty	sickerness	He knew with full sickerness that he had the right answer.	
chair (furniture)	settle	He bought a swivel settle for his room.	From an old use of settle, which formerly meant chair, seat.
For the modern meaning of long bench, one can say long settle.
chair (as in seat of authority)	settle	You should report your complaints to the settle.	Meaning extended here.
Also extended here to be a verb with the same meaning.
For the one holding the position, in addition to settle, settleman (feminine settlewoman) can be used (based on chairman and chairwoman).
chair (as in professorship)	settle	He has held a settle of mathematics for many years.	Meaning extended here.
chapter (as in section of a text)	capitle	There are twenty capitles in this book.	From ME capitle (< OE capitol, a borrowing from Latin).
chapter (as in period of time)	capitle	This marked a new capitle in my life.	Meaning extended here.
chapter (as in assembly of ecclesiastics)	capitle	The religious order held a chapter this morning.	From one meaning of ME capitle.
chapter (as in branch)	capitle	Our organization will open a new capitle in this city.	Meaning extended here.
chariot	cratwain	The Romans liked to race in cratwains.	From OE crætwǣn.
chattel	owngood	The animals are legally considered owngoods.	Based on the use of goods to refer to movable property, with own added here to clarify the meaning of goods (which can also refer to wares).
checker (game)	draft / draught	Would you like to play a game of drafts with me?	From the British use of draughts.
checker, check (as in design resembling a checkerboard)	draftboard / draughtboard	He wore a shirt with a draftboard pattern.	Based on the use of checkerboard to refer to the pattern. Extended here to be a verb.
cherry	chirse	The path was covered with chirse blossoms.	From OE cirse. Rhymes with hers.
chevalier	knight	The lord was protected by several knights.	
chief (as in leading figure)	head	I have to report to the village head about this.	Other words such as leader and foreman may also work and differ in connotation.
Extended here to its use in heraldry.
chief (as in most important)	main	What is the main reason for this change?	
chief (as in highest in rank)	head	He is the head cook of this kitchen.	
chieftain	headman	The five tribes' headmen gathered yesterday evening.	For the specific meaning of tribe leader, one can also use stemshead (see tribe) as a calque of Dutch stamhoofd.
chivalrous	knightly	His behavior was certainly not knightly.	
chivalry	knightliness	Sadly, knightliness is a foreign concept to him.	
choice (noun)	kir	I had no kir but to follow his orders.	From ME kire.
choice (adjective)	chise	He chose a chise place for dinner.	From ME chis. Rhymes with nice.
Christian	Christen	My neighbor is a Christen.	Now a dialectal word (from OE cristen).
Christianity	Christendom	Missionaries introduced Christendom to Japan.	
citizen	borougher	The boroughers of New York have chosen a new mayor.	Newly formed derivative (see city). Also used here to mean citizen of a country.
city	borough	I am part of this borough's government.	Rhymes with furrow.
For borough meaning administrative district, one can use ward.
clergy	holyclerkship	Only members of the holyclerkship are allowed to enter.	Based on holyclerk, a newly formed compound to translate cleric, a Latin borrowing, to disambiguate clerk meaning cleric from the now usual meaning of administrative assistant.
cloister	clauster	I saw a few nuns walking in the clauster.	From OE clauster (a borrowing from Latin).
Extended here to be a verb of the same meaning.
coffin	lichchest	The body was set carefully in the lichchest.	Calque of Icelandic líkkista. See corpse.
Extended here to be a verb with the same meaning as coffin.
coin	mint	How many mints do you have in your pocket?	From an old use of the word. Also used as a verb with the same meaning.
color, colour	blee	Red is my favorite blee.	Now an archaic word. Also extended to be a verb with the same meaning.
Hue is similar in meaning, but usually refers to a specific property of color.
command (as in order)	bid	Do as I bid!	Past tense: bade, past participle: bidden.
The noun is bidding.
command (as in have control over)	wield	The general wielded a host of soldiers.	From an old use of wield.
Also used as a noun meaning control. Extended here to also mean body of troops.
command (as in have solid possession of)	wield	No political party wielded a majority.	
command (as in mastery, good control)	wield	His wield of English is impressive.	
command (as in overlook)	overlook	The castle overlooked the city.	
commander	bidder	The bidder was strict with his men.	
commandment	bidding	We must follow God's ten biddings.	Religious use taken from ME.
common (as in shared)	meanly	We both have a meanly goal.	From ME menelich.
Or: meansome, a calque of German gemeinsam. The adjective may have existed in English, as shown by the OE derivative gemǣnsumian (share, impart).
One can also use mean, as this is its original meaning, and it later came to mean lowly, shabby, nasty (essentially a negative extension of common).
For commonplace (a later calque of Latin locus communis), we can form a new compound and use meanstead (see place).
For common sense, we can use mother wit.
For commonwealth, we can form meanwealth.
common (as in usual, ordinary)	wonly	Thinking like that is a very wonly mistake.	From ME iwonelich (derived from won meaning custom, habit). Similar to German gewöhnlich and Dutch gewoon.
Note that won rhymes with sun.
Everyday also works in some contexts.
commonality (as in shared feature)	meanliness	These lands have many meanlinesses.	The plural also replaces commons meaning shared resource as in tragedy of the commons.
commonality, commonalty (as in body of commoners)	wonliness	The wonliness wondered at the sight of the knight.	See commoner.
Some historical uses of commonalty meaning general group would probably be translated the same way as community.
commoner	wonly	A noble seldom marries a wonly.	Extension of wonly to be a noun.
The plural also replaces commons meaning common folk as in House of Commons.
community	meanship	The village has a very friendly meanship.	Calque of German Gemeinschaft.
concord	onereadness	The two parties eventually reached onereadness.	From OE ānrǣdnes. Read here is used in its archaic meaning of counsel, advice.
Extended here to other meanings of concord such as agreement, treaty and grammatical concord.
For the rare use of concord as a verb, one can say something like be at onereadness, e.g., both men were at onereadness on this matter.
concordant	oneread	All the critics were oneread about the work's weaknesses.	From OE ānrǣd.
concubine	cheaves	The noble had a son by a cheaves.	From ME cheves. Rhymes with eaves.
condemn	fordeem	The men were fordeemed to death.	From ME fordemen. Extended here to also mean deem unfit for use.
Condemnation is a later Latin borrowing and is now fordeeming.
confess	andet	I would like to andet all my sins.	From OE andettan. Stress is on the first syllable.
confession	andeting	He made a andeting about his crimes.	
confessor	andeter	The andeter told me not to worry about it.	
conquer	overwin	The Normans overwon England.	Now an archaic word.
conqueror	overwinner	The country was now ruled by a foreign overwinner.	
conquest	overwinning	The emperor had plans for overwinning.	
corpse	lich	The lady's lich was buried in that spot of the graveyard.	Now an archaic word.
One can also use licham from ME lichame.
For some older uses of corpse that refer to a living body, body works.
count (as in determine the number of)	tell	No one can tell all the stars.	This old meaning of tell is still found in untold and in teller.
Reckon has a similar meaning with the connotation of calculate.
For the meaning of both narrate and count, compare with the meanings of account and recount.
count (as in be of importance)	tell	Make every attempt tell.	One can also use reckon.
count (as in regard)	tell	Tell yourself lucky for not being at the site of the disaster last night.	From an old use of tell.
One can also use reckon.
count (as in include, take into account)	reckon	There are six members (seven if we reckon me).	
count (as in depend)	reckon	We are reckoning on his assistance for the project.	
count (as in process of counting)	telling	They began the telling of the votes.	
count (as in quantity, total)	tale	What's the final tale of all the members?	This old meaning of tale is now archaic.
count (as in charge, accusation)	tale	He has been arrested on several tales.	From one meaning of ME tale.
count (nobility)	earl	I besought the earl to help me.	Used as the equivalent of count in the British peerage.
For the feminine, see countess.
countess	earlen	The earlen has lost her book.	See -ess.
country	land	I have never visited any Asian lands.	Also used for country referring to a rural area (as opposed to an urban area like a city).
county (as in an administrative division)	shire	The land is split into many different shires.	
county (as in a count's domain)	earldom	The earldom was quite small.	
court (noun)	hoff	I have been asked to go to the king's hoff.	From OE hof. Meaning extended also to court of law.
court (as in woo)	woo	The man wooed his lover with many gifts.	Also used figuratively to mean seek support of.
court (as in try to obtain)	seek	The courtier secretly sought political power.	Or: seech (since seek shows Norse influence). Past tense and past participle of seech is still sought.
court (as in attract)	draw	That man always draws controversy with his remarks.	
courtier	hoffling	The hofflings have wondered what the king is planning.	Calque of German Höfling.
cousin	swire	I had dinner with my swire yesterday.	From OE geswigra apparently meaning male cousin (glossing Latin consobrinus). Extended here to refer to female cousins.
creation	making	Marvel at my latest making!	Create is a later formation from Latin and is now make.
creator	maker	Who is the maker of this invention?	
creature	shaft	All the shafts fled upon hearing a loud noise.	From ME shafte.
Wight can also be used, but is now generally used to refer to supernatural creatures or to human beings.
crime	firren	Murder is a serious firren.	From OE firen. Also used in the broader meaning of shameful act.
Misdeed can work, but is the word for bad deed in general.
criminal (adjective)	firrenly	What he has done is a firrenly offense.	
criminal (noun)	firrener	This is a place for convicted firreners.	
crown (as in what a king wears)	kinghelm	The king's kinghelm is golden.	From OE cynehelm, with substitution of king for the first element.
Also used as a verb meaning place a crown on (both literally and figuratively).
The word appears to be a common Germanic borrowing from Latin and is seldom attested in OE in the form of corōna. The OE word is not the source of modern crown, as the modern pronunciation can only be traced back to the Old French word. If the OE borrowing had survived, it would have become something like *corn; the phonetic development would have gone something like this: corōna > corene > corne > corn.
crown (as in the top of something)	top	We've reached the top of the hill.	For top of the head, one can use noll (now a dialectal word from OE hnol).
For more specific uses of crown, one can use compounds, e.g., toothtop for a dental crown.
Also used as a verb meaning cover the top of.
cry (as in shout)	roop	The man rooped for help.	From ME rop (< OE hrōp) and ropen (< OE hrōpan).
cry (as in shed tears)	weep	Jesus wept.	
cuckold (noun)	hornbearer	He was ridiculed for having become a hornbearer.	Semantic calque of Dutch hoorndrager. Based on the use (not only in English but also in other languages) of horns as a characteristic of cuckolds.
Cuckoldry is a later formation and is now hornbearerdom.
cuckold (verb)	horn	The wife horned her husband.	From an obsolete use of the verb horn.
cuckoo	yeak	He was awakened by a yeak.	From ME yek.
Cuckoo is probably from Old French cucu, but it should be noted that in many other languages, similar-sounding words have been formed based on the cuckoo's call. The replacement of the native word with an onomatopoeic word has happened in the West Germanic languages, but not in the North Germanic languages.
cumin	kimmen	This recipe uses kimmen as a spice.	From OE cymen. The modern form is from French.
dairy	deyhouse	The store ordered a lot of milk from the deyhouse.	Now a dialectal word. Dairy (from Anglo-French daierie) contains the native word dey, so dairy is etymologically dey-ery.
For dairy referring to dairy foods, one can say something like deyhouse foods, e.g., I started to buy more deyhouse foods.
dam (as in an animal's mother)	motherdeer	This is the horse's motherdeer.	Calque of German Muttertier, from mother + deer (in its old meaning of animal).
Older uses referring to any mother can be translated as mother.
dame (as in woman)	lady	Who does that lady think she is?	
dame (title)	burd	Burd Ellen retired from sailing years ago.	Now a poetic and obsolete word from ME birde (noblewoman). It appears to be a development from ME birde (< OE gebyrde, birth) or OE byrde (well-born).
Used here as the feminine equivalent of sir for knights.
For older uses of dame referring to a woman in authority, lady can also be used.
damn	warry	The zealot declared that the man would be warried for his sins.	Now an obsolete word. Rhymes with sorry.
Extended here to the coarse uses of damn, e.g., shut that damn(ed) door > shut that warried door, God damn it! > God warry it!.
damnation	warrying	He did not want to undergo eternal warrying.	
damsel	maiden	The knight saw a maiden standing by a tree.	
danger	freekenness	The sign warned of freekenness up ahead.	From OE frēcennes.
The verb endanger is a later formation and is now freeken (from OE frēcnian).
dangerous	freeken	He was working in a freeken line of work.	From OE frēcne.
dean	decanon	The university decanon met with various administrators.	From OE decanon (one in charge of ten monks), as this was the original sense of dean.
OE decanon is used instead of OE decan since the latter would have become deacon, which would have been confused with the existing word deacon.
debt	shild	I must work to pay off my shild.	From OE scyld. Rhymes with wild.
debtor	shilder	She was worried that the shilder would soon come.	From shild + -er.
decease (verb)	queal	Sadly, she quole last year.	From ME quelen. Past tense: quole, past participle: quolen. Used here as a more formal word for die.
Deceased is thus quolen.
decease (noun)	quealing	The king's quealing caused his son to inherit the throne.	Used here as a more formal word for death.
defiance	withstanding	That was an act of withstanding against the government.	
defy (as in resist)	withstand	How dare you withstand your superior!	The adjectival form defiant is a later French borrowing and is now withstanding, e.g., withstanding rebels.
defy (as in dare)	dare	He dared us to name a better book.	
deity (as in god)	god	Who now worships the gods of ancient Greece?	Note that for a goddess, the word is now gidden (from OE gyden).
deity (as in divinity)	godhood	He became so powerful that he began to have delusions of godhood.	
denizen	abider	I soon encountered a few abiders of this place.	From an old use of abide meaning reside.
Or: dweller (in which dwell meaning reside may show Norse influence).
depart	forthfare	He soon forthfared to the station.	From ME forthfaren. Also used for the euphemistic meaning of die.
departure	forthfare	I received news of her forthfare.	From ME forthfare (meaning departure from life). Used here in the literal sense as well.
deprive	bereave	I was bereft of my freedom.	Past tense and past participle are bereft.
Deprivation is a later Latin borrowing and is now bereaving.
desert (geography)	weesten	The weesten was hard to travel through.	From ME westen.
desert (as in just deserts)	forthaining	He has been given his just forthainings.	See deserve.
In some cases, earning can work.
desert (as in abandon)	forlet	I felt betrayed when my friend forlet me.	Now an obsolete word.
deserve	forthain	I do not think that he forthains his fortune.	Semantic calque of German verdienen (see serve).
In some cases, earn can work.
desist	aswike	The soldiers have been told to aswike from firing.	From ME aswiken.
Desistance is a later French borrowing and is now aswiking.
despair	wanhope	Recent events have made him wanhope at the future.	Now an obsolete word using the obsolete prefix wan- (showing deficiency). Used as both a noun and a verb.
die (singular of dice)	tavelstone	He rolled the tavelstone.	From OE tæflstān.
Extended here to its architectural use for a cubical part of a pedestal (since its use in architecture refers to its cubical shape).
die (as in embossing stamp)	stample	He used a stample to stamp his coins.	Newly formed derivative using stamp (probably from OE *stampian).
Or: stemple (using OE stempan). Compare with Dutch stempel.
die (as in device for cutting something into a particular shape)	carvel	Many manufacturing processes use carvels.	Newly formed derivative.
dig	delve	Let's go delving for buried treasure.	From an old use of delve. Used for both literal and figurative senses.
Dig is probably from Anglo-French *diguer, according to the MED.
The noun is now delving.
dime	tenpence	I have two pennies and three tenpences in my pocket.	
discord	twireadness	There was twireadness between the two parties.	From OE twirǣdness. Read here is used in its archaic meaning of counsel, advice.
Extended here to its musical meaning.
For the archaic use of discord as a verb, one can say something like be at twireadness, e.g., the advisor was at twireadness with the leader.
discordant	twiread	The discussion was full of twiread opinions.	From ME twired.
diocesan (adjective)	bishopricly	The bishopricly leaders gathered yesterday.	See diocese.
diocesan (as in leader of a diocese)	bishop	I consulted a bishop yesterday.	
diocesan (as in one of the clergy of a diocese)	bishopricker	The bishop was concerned about his bishoprickers.	
diocese	bishopric	The bishopric owns this building.	Or: bishoprich, with substitution of Norse-influenced -ric with native -rich.
Archdiocese is a later formation and is now archbishopric (or archbishoprich for a form without Norse influence).
disciple	learningman	Judas was the learningman who betrayed Jesus.	From OE leornungmann. The feminine is learningwoman.
disloyal	lease-hearted	The king was murdered by his lease-hearted minister.	See false.
One can also use untrue or lease if the context is clear, e.g., an untrue/lease man.
disloyalty	lease-heartedness	The traitor shall be punished for his lease-heartedness.	
dismal	dreary	Economics is sometimes called the dreary science.	
disobedience	unhearsomeness	The soldier showed unhearsomeness to his superior.	See obedient.
Obsolete form of disobedience: disobeisance.
disobedient	unhearsome	The master punished his unhearsome servant.	See obedient.
Obsolete form of disobedient: disobeisant.
disobey	not hearsome	How dare you not hearsome your orders!	See obey.
divination	soothsaying	The queen was fascinated with the magician's soothsaying.	
divine (adjective)	godly	He had never seen such godly powers before.	
divine (as in member of the clergy)	churchman	Samuel was such a good churchman.	
divine (as in theologian)	godloresman	I consulted the godloresman as part of my research.	See theologian.
divine (verb)	soothsay	He claimed to have the power to soothsay the future.	Rare word that was a backformation from soothsayer/saying. Extended here to mean find or guess as if by divination.
diviner	soothsayer	I besought the soothsayer to tell me what would befall.	
divinity (as in godliness)	godliness	He wore a veil to hide his godliness from the mortals.	
divinity (as in divine being)	godly being	All the minor godly beings gathered.	
divinity (as in theology)	godlore	He is a doctor of godlore.	Newly formed compound.
doubt	tween	I tween that what you say is true.	From OE twēon and twēonian.
dozen	twelvesome	I have two twelvesomes of eggs.	Dozen appears to be used in other Germanic languages except Icelandic.
dragon	drake	The knight slew the mighty drake.	From an old use of the word. Drake is ultimately a Germanic borrowing from Latin.
Note that this is unrelated to drake meaning male duck.
drug	lib	This lib will alleviate your sickness.	From OE lybb.
Extended here to be a verb.
duchess	hartowen	Where has the hartowen gone?	See duke and -ess.
duchy	hartowdom	The hartow sought to expand his hartowdom.	See duke.
duke	hartow	For his heroism, he was given the title of hartow.	From OE heretoga (literally army-leader). Based on German Herzog.
For the feminine, see duchess.
Or: hertow (showing the regular development of er). The ar form (unattested in Middle English) seems to be done here by analogy with harbor, etymologically a compound using OE here and meaning army-shelter.
The adjectival form, ducal, is a later French borrowing and is now hartowly.
