French word	English word	Example sentence	Notes
eager	keen	He was keen to leave already.	
eagle	erne	One day, I saw an erne flying above my house.	From the word's original meaning. For its current meaning of sea eagle, sea erne can be used.
emperor	coaser	Octavian was the first Roman coaser.	From OE cāsere.
For the feminine, see empress.
empire	coaserdom	The Roman coaserdom stretched from Britain to Egypt.	
empress	coasern	The coasern stayed inside the castle all day.	From OE cāsern, equivalent to coaser + -en (see -ess).
enchant	begale	The witch begaled the ring with a special spell.	From ME bigalen.
enchanter	begaler	I had to pay the begaler a hefty sum.	For the feminine, see enchantress.
enchantment	begaling	A mighty begaling had been cast on the ring.	
enchantress	begaleren	The begaleren cast a spell on him out of anger.	See -ess.
enemy	foe	I suspect that my foes are plotting against me.	
engender	breed	His misdeeds have bred widespread anger.	
enjoy	neet	The man neeted good health.	From OE nēotan meaning have the benefit of. Extended here to mean take pleasure in.
One can also use the expression find selth in (see joy).
Enjoyment is a later formation and is now neeting.
enmity	foeship	The foeship between the two has grown.	See enemy. Now an archaic word.
ennoble	athel	The king atheled him last year.	From OE æþelian. See noble.
enrich	richen	The new technology has richened our lives.	
entire (as in whole)	whole	The whole team has shown up.	Entirely is a later formation and is now wholly.
entire (as in intact)	whole	Thankfully, the relics have remained whole.	
entire (as in uncastrated)	unafired	He was gifted with an unafired horse.	Formed from OE afȳran (castrate).
entirety (as in wholeness)	wholeness	The plan has not been accepted in its wholeness.	
entirety (as in whole)	whole	The whole of last month was spent on research.	
envenom	beyelster	I beyelstered the dagger carefully.	From be- + yelster. See venom.
envious	evestful	His success made her quite evestful.	From OE æfestful (see envy).
envy	evest	His new car filled his neighbor with evest.	From ME evest. Rhymes with leavest.
Also used as a verb.
espy	sight	He sighted something hiding in the bushes.	
esquire (as in man of gentle birth)	goodlord	The country club was run by a goodlord.	From an obsolete word referring to local nobility.
esquire (title)	goodlord	This letter is addressed to John Smith, Goodlord.	Extended here to be a title mainly used by lawyers.
estrange	fremdledge	He was fremdledged from the club.	From OE fremedlǣcan (see strange).
Eucharist	housel	This was the first time when I received housel.	Now an archaic word.
evangelist	gospeler	I saw a gospeler on a TV show yesterday.	Also spelled gospeller.
example	bisen	Could you show me a bisen of how this theory can be used?	From ME bisne. Pronounced /ˈbaɪzən/.
exchequer	mathomhouse	The king was alarmed at the state of the mathomhouse.	From OE māðumhūs (treasure-house).
Note that exchequer originally meant chessboard, and chess is deemed an acceptable borrowing here (see chess above). However, since the concept of chessboard is easily translatable, this word is not borrowed here, unlike chess.
exemplar	forebisen	The king was a forebisen of good leadership.	From ME forebisne. The latter half is pronounced /ˈbaɪzən/.
Exemplary is a later Latin borrowing and is now forebisenly.
exemplify	bisen	The holy man bisened many kinds of virtue.	From ME bisnen meaning symbolize, betoken. Extended here to mean be an example of.
Pronounced /ˈbaɪzən/.
face (as in countenance)	anlet	One's anlet can reveal more than one's words.	From ME anlet.
Facial is a later Latin borrowing and is now anletly (adjective) and anlet cleansing (noun).
face (as in surface)	anlet	How many anlets does a cube have?	
face (as in be positioned toward)	behold	The statue is beholding the north.	From an old use of behold.
face (as in look at seriously)	behold	You must behold the facts and accept that we are in danger.	Meaning extended here.
face (as in confront in competition)	abide	I will abide him in the next round.	From an old use of abide.
face (as in present itself)	beset	What would you do if you were beset with a crisis?	
face (as in cover the surface)	overlay	The walls were overlaid with marble.	
fairy	fay	The little boy believed that fays existed.	Fay is deemed an acceptable French borrowing here (see fay above).
Faerie is a deliberately archaic spelling of the word. In its meaning of fairyland, fayland can be used instead.
For fairy tale, one can use fay tale or the attested phrase wonder tale.
faith	troth	Dost thou have troth in God?	Now an archaic word.
falcon	falken	The noble loves to hunt sport with his falken.	From OE *fealcen (suggested by the inflected form fealcnes). Related to the French word, which is from Latin.
The modern word is evidently from French, as the earliest attestations in Middle English can only be from the Old French form. In any case, the Old English word would have become *falken and thus would be identical to the modern word. However, the spelling needs to be altered, as falcon shows Latin influence. Moreover, the modern pronunciation should be something like /ˈfɔːkən/ (which in fact is a traditional pronunciation of falcon), as /l/ in falken would have been later lost through normal sound changes (compare with the phonetic development of talk).
false	lease	One should not say lease things.	From ME les. Rhymes with peace.
False is found in OE only once in a dubious instance, so the modern word is clearly from the French form.
False appears in other Germanic languages, though with a different final consonant. In German, the adjective was apparently borrowed from Old French fals, the modern form (falsch) showing influence from the Middle Dutch form valsc (probably an Old French borrowing, with the final s altered to -sc by analogy with native adjectives ending with -s/sc) and possibly the related verb fälschen (forge, counterfeit). The North Germanic languages seem to have borrowed the word from Middle Low German, e.g., Danish falsk, Icelandic falskur.
falsify	leasen	He leasened his results.	Newly formed derivative.
fame	lise	His heroic deeds brought him much lise.	From OE hlīsa. Rhymes with wise.
Famed is thus lised (attested as ME alised).
To avoid potential ambiguity with lies, one can say lisefulness.
famous	liseful	He became liseful for his works.	From OE hlīsful.
For a word meaning not famous (since unliseful means infamous), one can use liseless (a newly formed derivative).
fault (as in blame, failing)	shild	It's your shild that we lost!	See debt.
Extended here to broadly mean faulty move in contexts like tennis.
fault (as in err, do wrong)	shildy	I shildied when I fell for temptation.	From OE scyldigian (to sin).
fault (as in blame, find fault in)	beshildy	He was beshildied for his lack of vigilance.	Suggested by ME beshild (accused). Compare with German beschuldigen.
fault (geology)	britch	It turned out that I was living near an active britch.	Meaning extended here and based on Dutch breuk. See breach.
Extended here to be a verb meaning produce a fault.
feast	simble	He held a simble to celebrate the occasion.	From OE symbel (noun) and symblan (verb). Also used in the religious meaning.
Feast was also borrowed from French or Latin by Dutch and German; the North Germanic languages (except Icelandic) appear to have borrowed the word from German.
fee	toll	The performer demanded quite a high toll.	
festal	simblely	He was in a simblely mood.	From OE symbellīc.
Also used for festive, a later Latin borrowing.
festival	simbletide	The Romans held many simbletides.	From OE symbeltīd.
feud	faught	The faught between the two families began long ago.	From OE fǣhþ. For the phonetic development, compare with ME aughte (possessions) < OE ǣht. Note that the sequence hþ later became ht.
For the verb, one can use a phrase such as be in a faught with.
fig (fruit)	fike	There are many fikes in this orchard.	From ME fik (< OE fīc, a borrowing of Latin fīcus).
flower	blossom	There are many kinds of blossoms in the garden.	Also used as a verb with the same meaning as flower.
flour	meal	I bought a bag of meal for baking the cake.	Extended here to be a verb with the same meaning as flour.
folly (as in foolishness)	dweaseness	He failed to see the dweaseness in his actions.	See fool.
folly (as in extravagent building)	thrumbuilding	He thought to build a thrumtbuilding.	Newly formed compound using thrum (see majesty). Based on German Prachtbau.
The plural follies to refer to a theatrical revue is a recent borrowing from French.
fool (as in silly person)	dwease	You are such a dwease for believing that.	From OE dwǣs (meaning foolish). Rhymes with fleece.
Extended here to be a noun.
Fool referring to the dessert is of uncertain origin and may be the same word as this.
fool (as in jester)	merryman	The court merryman entertained the guests.	
fool (as in make a fool of)	bedwease	He bedweased her with his tricks.	Newly formed derivative.
fool (as in jest, joke)	play	I was only playing.	
foreign	eltheedy	I once traveled to an eltheedy land.	From OE elþēodig.
Outlandish originally meant this, and its current meaning of bizarre is essentially a negative extension of foreign.
If the meaning is clear, one can also use fremd (a dialectal word meaning strange, unfamiliar).
Foreigner is a later formation and is now eltheeder or outlander.
forest	wold	Many creatures live in this wold.	Now an archaic word, with meaning taken from ME.
For the verb and afforest (a later Latin borrowing), we can form a new derivative and use bewold.
form (as in shape)	shape	Genius comes in many shapes.	Used broadly to refer to appearance, e.g., verb forms > verb shapes.
Also used as a verb with the same meaning as form.
The adjectival form, formal, is a later borrowing from Latin and is translated as shapeful (now a rare word, with meaning extended), which is used since shapely now means beautiful, well-shaped.
form (as in empty document)	sheet	Please fill out this sheet.	To be more specific, one can use a modifier, e.g., tax forms > tax sheets.
found (as in lay the foundations of)	ground	The house is grounded on solid earth.	From an old use of ground.
found (as in establish)	ground	This town was grounded many years ago.	From an old use of ground.
found (as in base)	ground	His suspicions turned out to be well grounded.	
France	Frankland	The merchant stayed in Frankland for a few weeks.	From OE Francland.
fraternity	brotherhood	The brethren of the brotherhood shall meet again next week.	
fresh	fersh	I drank of the fersh river water.	From ME fersch (compare with Dutch vers). The form with metathesis appears to be from influence of French fresche since no such form is attested in OE, but OE fersc is well attested.
friar	brother	One day, a brother from the order came to my home.	
fruit	wassom	In this orchard, many wassoms are grown.	From ME wastme. Rhymes with blossom.
Also used figuratively.
Or: ovet (from ME ovet) or its later dialectal variant ovest (which has the specialized meaning of acorn and oak mast).
future (noun)	tocome	He claims that he can see into the tocome.	From ME tocome (< OE tōcyme). Similar to German Zukunft and Dutch toekomst.
The stress is on the first syllable, which is pronounced as too.
future (adjective)	tocoming	I will keep you informed about tocoming developments.	
gaiety	mirth	The party was full of mirth.	
garden	leighton	I took in the beauty of the leighton.	From ME leightoun.
Garden is ultimately from Proto-Germanic.
gardener	leightoner	I asked the leightoner what had happened.	
gay (as in merry)	merry	Poetry is sometimes called the merry science.	
gay (as in bright)	bright	Don we now our bright apparel.	
gay (as in homosexual)	ilklusting	Some ancient Greeks are said to have engaged in ilklusting acts.	Semantic calque of homosexual.
Ilk is an obsolete word for same, and lust refers to sexual desire.
Or: samelusting (as same is a Norse borrowing).
The noun is now ilkluster.
gem	imm	I own several kinds of imms.	From OE gim, which itself is a borrowing from Latin.
It seems that /j/ before /ɪ/ is regularly lost, which is why the modernized form is imm.
gender	kin	French has two kins: masculine and feminine.	From some OE and ME uses of kin (note that gender fundamentally means genus).
For old uses of gender meaning type, one can use kind.
As kin has other meanings, it may be best sometimes to use a compound for clarity such as wordkin (for grammatical gender).
gentle (as in not harsh)	soft	The teacher spoke with a soft tone to her students.	
gentle (as in make or become gentle)	soften	I had to soften my tone.	
gentle (as in of high social standing)	well-born	The commander comes from a well-born family.	For gentle in gentle birth, one can say good.
For gentleman (which originally meant man of gentle birth), one can use lording from ME lordinge (which had a variety of meanings, including man of high social rank).
For gentlewoman, one can use lordingwoman (a newly formed compound).
Ladies and gentlemen is thus ladies and lordings.
Genteel is a later French borrowing and is now couth (rhymes with booth).
gentry	lordinghood	Many of these estates were built by the landed lordinghood.	
german (in familial words)	full	He is my full brother.	Example: cousin-german > full cousin.
For the older sense of closely related, one can use akin or kindred.
For the obsolete use as a noun meaning near relative, one can use near kinsman.
germane	kindred	Your question is not kindred to the discussion.	
giant (noun)	eaten	I found myself in a cave that an eaten lived in.	From ME eten. A variant of ettin, originally a Scottish form.
Other words for giant from OE such as ent and ettin are generally used in fantasy to refer to specific kinds of giants.
giant (adjective)	eatenish	He managed to heave the eatenish table.	
ginger	ingiver	He added a teaspoon of ingiver as part of the recipe.	From OE gingifer (ultimately a Latin borrowing). Pronounced as /ˈɪnd͡ʒɪvər/.
The modern form ginger is from French, given the initial /dʒ/. The Old English word probably had /j/ because g would have undergone palatalization because of the following i.
Ingiver is the regular phonetic descendant of the OE word; it is assumed that /j/ would have been lost since loss of /j/ before /ɪ/ seems regular.
glorify	wolder	He sang a song that woldered God.	From OE wuldrian.
glorious	wolderful	His was a wolderful victory.	From OE wuldorfull.
glory	wolder	He died for the glory of his land.	From OE wuldor. Also a verb with the same meaning as glory.
grand (adjective)	great	The actor has made his great entrance.	
grand (in familial words)	great	My greatfather has been waiting for me.	Already found in words such as great-aunt and great-nephew.
grand (as in a thousand)	thousand	That guy earns about fifty thousand a year.	Or: thou (pronounced with /θ/ since it is a shortening of thousand).
Greek (adjective and language)	Greekish	He studied Latin and Old Greekish in his university years.	Now an archaic word.
This use of Greek appears to show influence from French grec or may even be a direct borrowing thereof. The French word is used for both the adjective and the language, and these uses are attested in Anglo-French grec.
Ancient Greek should then be Old Greekish (compare with German Altgriechisch).
grief	heef	She felt great heef after her husband died.	From OE hēof.
grieve	heeve	For a long time, I heeved my mother's death.	From OE hēofan.
grievous	heefsome	This heefsome deed cannot go unpunished.	
guard	ward	The city wards are searching for criminals.	From ME ward. The verb is from ME warden.
One can also use wardman from ME wardman in case clarity is needed to distinguish it from ward meaning administrative division.
The use of guard meaning action of guarding is from the current word ward, e.g., keep guard > keep ward.
This replaces guard in compounds, e.g., lifeguard > lifeward (compare with OE līfweard), bodyguard > bodyward. Note that ward is pronounced differently from the suffix -ward in words such as backward and awkward, and the suffix is etymologically unrelated.
guardian	keeper	Are you the keepers of this boy?	
guide (verb)	wise	Could you wise him to the front row?	Now a dialectal word from OE wīsian.
guide (noun)	wiser	This man will act as your wiser for the tour.	
haste	hie	He ran in hie after the thief.	Now an obsolete word.
Hasten is a later formation and is now hie (now an archaic verb).
Hasty is a later formation and is now hieful (from ME hihful).
Posthaste is a later formation and can be replaced with something like hiefully or in great hie.
hearse	lichwain	He drove the lichwain for the funeral.	Calque of German Leichenwagen.
In its older meaning of framework placed over a coffin, one can use something like lichchest framework (see coffin).
heir	erver	The prince is the erver to the throne.	Based on OE irfa (see inherit).
Heiress is a later formation and is now erveren.
helmet	helm	Make sure to wear your helm before starting.	Now an archaic word.
herb	wort	Various worts are stored in the kitchen.	Rhymes with hurt.
The adjectival form, herbal, is a later borrowing from Latin and is now wortly.
herbage (as in herbs collectively)	worts	This country has beautiful worts.	
herbage (as in succulent parts of herbs)	greens	He partook of the greens.	
herbage (as in vegetation grazed by animals)	grazing worts	The cows began to eat some of the grazing worts.	Newly formed compound.
herbage (as in right to pasture)	leasowright	He was not granted leasowright.	Newly formed compound using leasow (see pasture).
heritage	erf	My grandfather left me this house as part of my erf.	From ME erf, with meaning taken from OE.
heron	rower	I saw a rower at the nearby lake.	From OE hrāgra. For the phonetic development that assumes that g was part of the first syllable and was thus [ɣ] (which would have later been vocalized later), compare with OE twēgra, the genitive of twēgen (> NE twain), and its ME form tweire, which shows that g in the OE form was not part of the second syllable, since it would not have been vocalized to i later.
historian	stearwriter	Some stearwriters have challenged this claim.	From OE stǣrwrītere.
history	stear	Those who do not learn from stear are doomed to repeat it.	From OE stǣr (possibly an originally Irish form of Latin historia).
Historical is a later Latin borrowing and is now stearly.
Historic, also a later Latin borrowing, is now stearish.
honest	truthful	There's no such thing as a truthful politician.	
honesty	truthfulness	Truthfulness is the best policy.	
honor, honour	ore	The knight showed ore in his conduct.	From ME ore. Also used as a verb with the same meaning as honor.
honorable, honourable	oreful	This is the only oreful course of action.	
hospital (as in medical institution)	sickhouse	He had to be sent to a sickhouse.	Now a rare word.
hospital (as in institution for the needy)	needhouse	Many old men often went to the needhouse for help.	Newly formed compound.
hospitality	guestfriendliness	A good host knows how to show guestfriendliness.	Calque of German Gastfreundlichkeit.
Or: yestfriendliness (as guest is from Norse).
Hospitable is a later French borrowing and is now yestfriendly (or guestfriendly).
hostel	harborhouse / harbourhouse	We spent the night at a harborhouse.	Newly formed compound using harbor in its old meaning of lodging, since harbor now often refers to a port.
hostelry	harborhousing / harbourhousing	The finest harborhousing was a nearby inn.	
hour	stound	There are twenty-four stounds in a day.	Now a dialectal word that originally meant period of time, while. Extended here to refer to hour for timekeeping.
human (noun)	mennish	Thankfully, the disease does not affect mennishes.	Extension of ME mennish (an adjective meaning human) to be a noun. Based on how the other West Germanic languages use their cognates to mean human.
One can even shorten this word and turn this to mensh (following Dutch mens and German Mensch).
In some cases, man works as well, e.g., all men are created equal.
human (adjective)	mennishly	There is an astounding amount of variety in mennishly societies.	From OE mennisclíc. It seems that other Germanic languages base the adjective on their word for human + their cognate of -ly.
humane	mennishly	It is not mennishly to treat the animals like that.	Extended here to mean humanistic, e.g., humane education > mennishly education.
humanity	mennishhood	The war brought out the best and the worst of mennishhood.	Newly formed derivative.
For the sense of quality of being human/humane, one can also use mennishliness.
For the sense of human beings collectively, mankind also works.
hurt	scathe	You scathe me with your words.	Now an archaic word still found in unscathed and scathing.
Or: shathe, from ME shathe (noun) and OE sceþþan and sceaþian (verb), since scathe is from Norse.
In some cases, harm may also work.
Note that the adjective is simply the past participle and thus is now shathed.
ignoble	unathel	He did so for unathel purposes.	See noble.
imagination	forestelling	Children have such wild forestellings.	See imagine.
imaginative	forestellsome	He is a forestellsome writer.	See imagine.
imagine (as in form a mental image)	forestell oneself	Forestell yourself what it is like to be in my shoes.	Calque of German vorstellen using dialectal stell (from OE stellan). Used reflexively.
imagine (as in suppose)	believe	Everyone believed that he had gone home already.	There are other ways to say this, e.g., reckon, ween.
impatience	unthild	One of his flaws is unthild.	From ME unithild. Rhymes with wild.
impatient	unthildy	The delays have caused me to become unthildy.	From OE ungeþyldig.
imperial	coaserly	Coaserly soldiers have invaded the town.	See emperor.
impossibility	unmightlihood	What you are suggesting is an unmightlihood.	See impossible. Newly formed derivative based on likelihood.
impossible	unmightly	It is unmightly to finish this task.	From OE unmihtlic.
impoverish	forarm	His policies only served to forarm people.	Newly formed derivative of arm (see poor) using for- in its obsolete use to form verbs from adjectives.
Impoverishment is a later French borrowing and is now forarming.
Obsolete form of impoverish: impover.
imprison	quartern	He was quarterned for a year.	From OE cweartern (extended here to be a verb).
imprisonment	quarterning	I was sentenced to two years' quarterning.	
infamy	unlise	This is a day that will go down in unlise.	From OE unhlīsa. Rhymes with wise.
Infamous is a later Latin borrowing and is thus unliseful (from OE unhlīsful).
Obsolete form of infamy: infame.
influence	inflow	There is a great deal of French inflow in our vocabulary.	Essentially a calque of the Latin word.
Or: inflood (compare with Dutch invloed).
influx	inflow	The country has recently seen an inflow of tourists.	
inherit	erve	I erved a great fortune from my father.	From OE irfan.
Obsolete variant of inherit: herit.
inheritance	erving	He received a comfortable erving.	Or: erf (see heritage).
Obsolete variant of inheritance: heritance.
inhuman, inhumane	unmennishly	The prisoners were held in unmennishly conditions.	See human.
inhumanity	unmennishliness	It was shocking to learn the unmennishliness of his crimes.	See humanity.
inquest	inseeking	There was an inseeking into his death.	Calque of inquest. See quest.
Or: inseeching (as seek shows Norse influence).
ire	wrath	You do not want to incur his wrath.	Or: anger (which is from Norse).
isle	island	I have never been to those islands before.	
ivory	elpsbone	This figurine is made of elpsbone.	From ME elpes bon. Extended here to refer to the color.
The adjectival form is elpsbony.
