French word	English word	Example sentence	Notes
jail, gaol	haft	He has been sent to haft.	From OE hæft (imprisonment, captivity).
Also used as a verb meaning jail, confine (from OE hæftan).
jailer, gaoler	haftward	The haftward brought me some food.	From haft + ward (see guard).
jaundice	yellowadle	He suffered from a severe case of yellowadle.	From ME yelwe adle (in which adle means disease).
javelin	atgore	The warrior threw an atgore at his opponent.	From OE ætgār.
jaw	chavel	He struck the man in the chavel.	From ME chavel. Rhymes with navel.
jest (as in joke)	laughter	The clown said many bad laughters.	From an old use of laughter. Also used for the meaning of laughing matter, object of ridicule.
jest (as in fun)	game	All that he said was in game.	From an old use of game.
jest (verb)	make a laughter	He made a laughter about the situation.	For jester (as in joker), one can use laughtermaker (an attested compound).
For jester (as in court buffoon), one can use merryman.
One can also use game in its old meaning of play, jest, e.g., surely you jest > surely you game.
Jew	Yowd	Many Yowds live in Europe.	From OE Iūdēas and Iūdan (both of which are plural forms). Rhymes with loud.
Judaism is a Latin borrowing and is now Yowddom (compare with Christendom and words in other Germanic languages such as Dutch jodendom).
Jewish is a later formation and is now Yowdish.
jewel	athelstone	This case holds several athelstones.	Calque of German Edelstein.
jeweler, jeweller	athelstonewright	Her father worked as an athelstonewright.	Newly formed compound using the archaic word wright.
jewellery, jewelry	athelstones	Someone has stolen my athelstones.	
Jewry	Yowdish folk	We talked about the history of American Yowdish folk.	
jolly (adjective)	merry	The host was a very merry man.	
jolly (adverb)	pretty	Why, that's a pretty good idea!	
journal (as in diary)	daybook	I have recorded the events in my daybook.	Extended here to be a verb.
journal (as in magazine)	timewrit	This is discussed in many academic timewrits.	Calque of German Zeitschrift.
journey	wayfare	I encountered many peculiar things in my last wayfare.	One can also use fare by itself if the context is clear.
For journeyman, one can use daysworkman, a newly formed compound, as journeyman uses journey in its obsolete meaning of a day's work.
joust	tilt	The two knights agreed to fight in a tilt.	From an old meaning of tilt, which is from OE *tyltan.
jovial	merry	He seems to be in a merry mood.	
joviality	merriness	He greeted us with much merriness.	
joy	selth	He found much selth in his wealth.	From ME selth.
For the verb, see rejoice.
joyous	selthful	This is a selthful occasion.	
judge (verb)	deem	Deem not, lest ye be deemed.	
judge (noun)	deemer	I shall be the deemer of that.	
judgement, judgment	doom	According to the king's doom, the prisoner shall be set free.	From the word's original meaning.
Deeming can also work, e.g., the court's judgment > the court's doom/deeming.
kerchief	headcloth	I wore a headcloth for protection.	Handkerchief is now handcloth.
Neckerchief is now neckcloth.
kitten	cattock	I fed the cattock some fish.	From cat + -ock (diminutive suffix found in hillock).
Or: catling (as diminutive -ling is from Norse).
labor, labour	arveth	This work involves much arveth.	From OE earfoþe (which also had the more general meaning of hardship). Extended here to be a verb.
lake	mere	We rowed a boat in the mere.	Now an archaic word.
Lake is sometimes traced back to OE lacu, but the native word meant stream, channel (which is kept in the dialectal word lake), and the modern word is from Old French lac or Latin lacus.
lamp	blokern	The blokern on my desk is on.	From ME blacern (< OE blācern, literally bright-place).
Lamp is a common Germanic borrowing.
language	speech	The author uses speech in many creative ways.	We can also use tongue in some contexts, e.g., I know nothing about the French speech/tongue.
languish	pine	The man pined in prison for several years.	Also pine away.
lantern	lightfat	The traveler lit a lightfat as night approached.	From ME lihhtfatt (< OE lēohtfæt, literally light-vessel).
Note that the second word in the compound is vat, originally a southern dialectal form. Fat is used here since initial /v/ in standard English phonology is mainly due to French influence.
Lantern is found in most other Germanic languages.
lay (as in poem)	leeth	The minstrel entertained the crowd with a romantic leeth.	From ME leth.
lay (as in non-clergy, non-professional)	lewd	Lewd men have a limited understanding of the matter.	From an obsolete use of lewd.
Or: lawd (from an ME variant that one can use for semantic differentiation). Interestingly, according to the OED, there was some degree of differentiation of the senses in Older Scots, which used forms such as lawd in the sense of non-clergy and lewd in its pejorative meanings of wicked and lascivious.
The word for lay in other Germanic languages is ultimately from Latin lāicus (which is found in English as laic; lay is the French form). If English had borrowed the word and nativized it, it would be layish (substituting -ish for -ic).
legal (as in pertaining to the law)	ealy	I have some ealy business to deal with.	Based on Middle English e (the native word for law).
Or: lawly (as law is a Norse borrowing).
legal (as in permitted by law)	eaful	The bill does not make this eaful.	Or: lawful (as law is a Norse borrowing).
Illegal is a later French or Latin borrowing and is now uneaful (or unlawful).
lesson (as in what is taught)	lore	Today's lore is about multiplication.	From an old use of lore.
For its archaic use as a verb meaning instruct, teach or lear (now a dialectal verb) can be used.
For its archaic use as a verb meaning admonish, chide can be used.
lesson (as in passage read aloud)	reading	The churchman read the first reading during the service.	
letter (as in character)	bookstaff	What is the first bookstaff of the alphabet?	Now an archaic word. Plural: bookstaves.
If the context is clear, staff by itself can be used.
We can also extend this to mean literature in the plural, e.g., the world of letters > the world of bookstaves (as letters is essentially another way to refer to the written word).
Lettered in the meaning of educated is now well-read or learned (as in learned man).
letter (as in written message)	errandwrit	They wrote each other several love errandwrits.	From OE ǣrendgewrit. In this word, errand has its old meaning of message.
letter (as in mark with a letter)	bestaff	Each shape in the picture is bestaffed.	Newly formed derivative.
lion	lee	The lee let out a great roar.	From OE lēo (a Latin borrowing).
lioness	leen	The hiker said that he had seen a leen.	See -ess.
lineage	strind	He comes from an ancient strind.	Now an obsolete word. Rhymes with find.
loin	lend	He wrapped a cloth around his lends.	Now an obsolete word.
loyal	true-hearted	The business has rewarded its most true-hearted customers.	One can also use true if the context is clear, e.g., true to his master.
Obsolete form of loyal: leal.
loyalty	true-heartedness	He has shown nothing but true-heartedness to his master.	Obsolete form of loyalty: lewty.
madam (title)	lady	She became Lady President of the council.	
madam (as in mistress of a household)	houselady	The houselady and I went out shopping yesterday.	
madam (as in mistress of a brothel)	brothellady	She is the brothellady of this place.	From brothel + lady.
madam, ma'am (form of address)	lady	How can I help you, lady?	My lady may be used in more formal contexts such as addressing certain nobles.
magic	golder	I wish to unlock the secrets of golder.	From ME galder (a West Midlands form descending from OE galdor, gealdor). For the phonetic development, compare with old (< OE eald).
The adjectival form, magical, is from Latin and is translated here as golderly.
Extended here to be a verb meaning make or move by magic.
magician	golderer	The golderer amazed us with his might.	
majesty	thrum	The thrum of the scenery was breathtaking.	From ME thrum.
Note that majesty appears to have been borrowed by other Germanic languages except Icelandic. Without French influence, English would have borrowed the word as mayestat (/ˈmæ.jəs.tət/).
The adjectival form, majestic, is a later formation and can be translated as thrumful (from OE þrymfull) or mayestatish (if one is willing to use mayestat).
mansion	lordhouse	The businesswoman owned several lordhouses.	Calque of German Herrenhaus, as a mansion was originally a lord's chief residence.
march (as in border area)	mark	The lord was given the mark to protect.	From an obsolete use of mark to mean boundary.
Extended here to be a verb meaning have a common border, e.g., England marks with Scotland.
For clarity, we can form a new compound and use markland (essentially borderland).
market	chapstow	I went to the chapstow to buy a few things.	From OE cēapstōw. Extended here to be a verb.
Market is a late OE borrowing and may not be of French origin, as it may have been borrowed from Latin or another Germanic language instead. Moreover, all the other Germanic languages have borrowed the word from Latin, so even without the Norman Conquest, English likely would have borrowed the word anyway.
marquess, marquis	markearl	The markearl has felt sick for the last few days.	Based on German Markgraf, in which Graf is the equivalent of count, earl. Mark in English is used here with the old meaning of march (border area).
The feminine, marchioness, is from Medieval Latin and is now markearlen (see -ess).
The derivative marquessate/marquisate is a later formation and is now markearldom.
marriage	wedlock	My friend and his wife have had a happy wedlock.	
marry	wed	Will you wed me?	The archaic interjection marry is from the name Mary, which is from French.
mason	stonewright	These structures were built by stonewrights.	From OE stānwyrhta. Extended here to be a verb meaning build with masonry.
masonry	stonework	His stonework is to be admired.	
mastery	mastership	The students managed to acquire a mastership of French.	Note that master is from OE mægester (a borrowing from Latin), which naturally became maister in Middle English and was later reinforced by the French word. The word shows simplification of ai to a before st, according to the OED. Other examples of this are ME frasten, a later form of fraisten (from Norse freista), ME trasten, a later form of ME traisten (from Norse treysta).
Master probably does not show influence from the Anglo-French form, as the main form in Anglo-French seems to have been mestre, and master a minor variant.
matrimonial	wedlockly	He is knowledgeable about wedlockly problems.	Newly formed derivative.
matrimony	wedlock	His dreams of wedlock have come true.	
mayor	boroughreeve	The boroughreeve held a conference last week.	From OE burhgerēfa. Borough rhymes with furrow.
Mayoress is a later formation and is now boroughreeven (see -ess).
Mayoral is a later formation and is now boroughreevely.
Perhaps this word would have been reduced to something like boriff (compare with sheriff, which is etymologically shire-reeve), though there is no way of knowing for sure.
mean (average)	middleworth	Calculate the middleworth of these numbers.	Calque of German Mittelwert.
The adjectival form is now middleworthy, e.g., what is the mean temperature > what is the middleworthy temperature.
means (method)	middle	I will use all middles to accomplish my goals.	From an old use of middle.
By means of is now by the middle of (attested in Middle English).
Extended here to also mean resources, riches, e.g., a man of means > a man of middles.
mediocre	middling	The story is rather middling, to be honest.	
melody	swinsing	His music has a nice swinsing to it.	From OE swinsung. Given the sound development of cleanse, it should probably be pronounced /ˈswɪnzɪŋ/.
Most other Germanic languages have borrowed melody as well.
merchandise (noun)	ware	The merchant displayed his ware in his shop.	Also can be used in the plural, e.g., he showed off his wares.
merchandise (verb)	chap	Here are some ways to chap your wares.	Now a dialectal word (originally a phonetic variant of the obsolete verb cheap).
merchant	chapman	I bought a few goods from the chapman.	Now an archaic word. The feminine is chapwoman.
For the compound merchantman, one can use lastship (from OE hlæstscip meaning cargo ship) or freightship (using freight, a loanword from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German).
minstrel	gleeman	The gleeman made us laugh with his performance.	Now a historical word.
minstrelsy	gleemancraft	His gleemancraft delighted us all.	Newly formed compound.
miracle	wonder	It is a wonder that the boy managed to survive the incident.	Miracle worker is thus wonder-worker (which is attested).
miraculous	wonderly	She had managed to make a wonderly recovery.	Now an obsolete word.
mirror (noun)	looking glass	Looking glass upon the wall, who's the fairest of them all?	Glass on its own may also work if the context is clear.
mirror (verb)	glass	The clear water glassed her face.	Extended here to figurative meanings of mirror such as his life mirrored hers.
mistress (feminine of master)	masteren	She is a masteren at archery.	See -ess.
For mistress in its old use as a title (modern Mrs.), one can use goodwife, e.g., Mrs. Smith > Goodwife Smith.
For Miss, one can use goody (simply a variant of goodwife, but extended here to also be used for unmarried women), e.g., Miss May > Goody May.
mistress (as in extramarital lover)	leman	The wife grew furious upon learning about her husband's leman.	Now an archaic word.
mix	minge	Minge the two colors together.	Now a dialectal word from OE mengan.
The modern word mix is almost certainly not from OE miscian (which would now be *misk because the OE word had /sk/); according to the OED, mix up to the 17th century was used mainly in the past participle, which aligns with a derivation from Anglo-French mixt.
monarch	onewielder	Onewielders must wield their might wisely.	Based on OE ānwealda.
The adjectival form is now onewielderly.
monarchy	onewielderdom	The British onewielderdom is the subject of much gossip.	
money	fee	He spends his fee recklessly as if he were rich.	Now an obsolete word. Unrelated to fee meaning payment, as that word is from French.
mortgage	wedset	I took out a wedset to buy the house.	Now an obsolete word. Historically used in Scottish law to refer to mortgages. Wed here is used as a noun meaning pledge (see pawn).
mount (as in mountain)	barrow	Who first climbed Barrow Everest?	See mountain.
Mount is sometimes traced to OE munt, but the OE word would have become *munt (rhyming with hunt). The modern form mount is from the French pronunciation.
mountain	barrow	It took a long time to climb over the barrow.	From an old use of barrow (now an archaeological word meaning tumulus).
Or: berrow (from an obsolete ME variant that would have become the regular reflex of OE beorg).
multiplication	manifolding	This development encouraged the manifolding of factories.	Extended here to the mathematical use.
multiply	manifold	If only I could manifold my earnings with ease!	Also used intransitively. Extended here to the mathematical use.
murder	morther	He was charged for morther.	From ME morther (noun) and mortheren (verb).
Murder may have resulted from native sound changes (as the change /ð/ to /d/ occasionally occurred, e.g., OE geforþian > afford), or it may have come from influence of the French forms, which were found in Middle English, e.g., mordre, murdre. Morther (a form certain to be native) can be used instead if one feels that murder is foreign.
Murderous is a later formation and is now morthersome.
murderer	mortherer	I suspected that he was the mortherer.	From ME mortherer.
mustard	semp	He likes to eat hot dogs with semp.	From ME senep. For the phonetic development, compare with hemp (< OE henep).
mutton	sheepflesh	He ate his sheepflesh slowly.	Or: sheepmeat.
Can be shortened to: sheep.
mysterious	rinish	The hero soon encountered a rinish stranger.	Based on ME runish.
mystery	rine	I love solving murder rines.	From ME irine (< OE gerȳne).
nation	theed	He spoke with representatives from other theeds.	From ME thede.
National is a later French borrowing and is now theedly or theeder (in the sense of citizen).
Most other Germanic languages have borrowed nation as well.
natural	kindful	It is kindful to feel that way.	From ME kindeful, which is used since kindly now means warm-hearted.
Extended here to be a noun with the same meaning as natural.
nature	kind	It is not in my kind to harm a fellow human.	From the word's original meaning.
nephew	neave	I love my neave as much as I love my own son.	From ME neve.
niece	nift	My nift is such a darling girl.	From ME nifte.
noble	athel	The man talked with a few athel ladies.	From ME athel.
Found in the historical word atheling (pronounced with /ð/).
Ennoble is a later French borrowing and is now athelen.
nobility	athelness	Those of athelness must be of good education.	
noun	nameword	The word baker is a nameword.	Calque of German Namenwort, with meaning narrowed to substantive in English.
number (as in quantity)	tale	2 is an even tale.	See count.
Number meaning numerical symbol (like in phone number or problem number 1) and act, musical piece seems to be a common Germanic borrowing.
number (grammar)	tale	German inflects verbs to show tale.	Attested in OE.
number (as in count, enumerate)	tell	All our options can be told on one hand.	See count.
number (as in amount to)	tell	All the signatures tell 1,000.	One can also use tell up to (now occasionally used).
number (as in include in a group)	reckon	He was reckoned among the best performers.	Extended here to be used intransitively, e.g., they reckon among my friends.
obedience	hearsomeness	The general demanded hearsomeness from his soldiers.	From ME hersumnesse.
obedient	hearsome	He is a good and hearsome servant.	From ME hersum.
obeisance	manship	We gave manship to the king.	From ME manship.
Extended here to have the concrete meaning of respectful gesture.
obeisant	manshipful	The servants made a manshipful gesture to their master.	
obey	hearsome	Thou shalt hearsome thy superior.	From ME hersumen.
Obsolete form of obey: obeish.
ocean	sea	Various creatures live in the sea.	The adjectival form, oceanic, is a later Latin borrowing and is now seaish or sealy.
offer (as in propose)	bid	He once bid to help me.	From an old use of bid (as in bid at an auction).
Though OE had offrian, the word meant sacrifice and did not have its current general meaning, which it gained from French in Middle English.
Offer with the meaning of sacrifice is still acceptable, but the noun form should be offering.
offer (as in present)	bid	The builder bid his services to me.	
oil	eal	This barrel is full of eal.	From ME ele. Ultimately a West Germanic borrowing of the Latin word.
olive (as in the fruit)	ealberry	He chopped the ealberries with a knife.	From OE eleberge. Extended here to be used for the color as well.
olive (as in the tree)	ealbeam	He thought about buying an ealbeam.	From ME elebem.
opine	ween	He weened that his country was better than mine.	Now an archaic word.
opinion	weening	In my weening, he is wasting his time.	Opinionated is a later formation and is now self-weening (now an obsolete word).
ordain (as in appoint)	hoad	He was hoaded a priest.	From ME hoden.
Old uses meaning arrange, put in order can be replaced with dight (see order).
ordain (as in decree)	will	This is simply what destiny has willed.	Conjugated as a regular verb.
order (as in arrangement, sequence)	dighting	What dighting should these numbers be in?	From dight, now a literary word. The meaning is extended from the meaning of arrange from ME dighten.
The verb is dight.
For in order to, one can use so as to, e.g., in order to learn > so as to learn.
For in order that, one can use so that, e.g., in order that we may learn > so that we may learn.
order (as in method)	dighting	There is no sense of dighting in his scheme.	Extension of meaning here.
order (as in obedience of the law)	dighting	What must be done to restore dighting?	Extension of meaning here.
order (as in condition)	dighting	All the ships are in good dighting, sir.	Extension of meaning here.
order (as in command)	bid	I am only doing what I am bidden, ma'am.	Past tense: bade, past participle: bidden.
The verb is also attested in the use of request, e.g., order dinner > bid dinner.
The noun is bidding, e.g., follow my order > follow my bidding.
order (as in rank, level, degree)	hoad	There are nine hoads of angels.	From ME hode. Also used for holy orders.
Extended here to the mathematical and taxonomical uses of order.
order (as in society, organization)	hoad	Many religious hoads have appeared these last few years.	
orphan	stepbarn	The poor stepbarn lost his parents at an early age.	From ME stepbarn.
Differentiated here from stepchild, which formerly could mean orphan but now only means child of a previous marriage.
For the verb, one can use a phrase such as make a stepbarn, e.g., she was orphaned > she was made a stepbarn.
Orphanage is a later formation and is now stepbarnhouse.
