French word	English word	Example sentence	Notes
tally (as in tally stick)	talestick	I recorded the score with a talestick.	Newly formed compound preserving tale in its old meaning of number, total (see count).
tally (as in record, count)	telling	I have been keeping a telling of all the accidents so far.	See count.
tally (as in score, amount)	tale	What's the tale so far?	See count.
tally (as in count the number of)	tell	They began to tell the votes.	See count.
tally (as in correspond)	match	Why does his story not match hers?	
targe	tarrow	The squire only had a tarrow and a wooden sword to fight with.	From OE targa, targe (possibly an early Norse borrowing). The modern word comes from French, as shown by the presence of /dʒ/ in the pronunciation.
taste (faculty)	smack	His sickness caused him to lose his smack.	Or: smatch (as a less common variant now).
taste (as in quality)	smack	This drink has an exquisite smack.	
taste (as in small quantity)	smack	This musical piece has a smack of jazz in it.	
taste (as in good style)	smack	You have excellent smack in music.	Meaning extended here.
taste (as in liking)	smack	I have a smack for traveling.	Meaning extended here.
taste (as in sense by tasting)	smack	Do you want to smack my freshly baked cookies?	
taste (as in have a taste of)	smack	This smacks like cinnamon.	
tavern	inn	I spent the night at a nearby inn.	
tense (grammar)	tide	Sank is the past tide of sink.	From the word's original meaning, as tide referred to time, like in the saying time and tide wait for no man.
theologian	godloresman	Godloresmen are not the only ones who can read the Bible.	Based on godlore (see theology) + loresman (from ME loresman, which meant instructor).
theology	godlore	As one can tell, godlore is about God.	Newly formed compound.
Theological is a Latin borrowing and is now godlorely.
throne	highsettle	The king sat quietly on his highsettle.	A modern word based on OE hēahsetl (literally high seat).
Throne (borrowed from French and later re-formed through influence of its Greek forebear) is found in most other Germanic languages.
toil	swink	He swank in the fields all day.	Now an obsolete word.
Past tense: swank, past participle: swunk.
touch (as in make contact)	rine	Do not rine the stove while it is hot.	Now an obsolete word.
touch (as in move emotionally)	rine	His words rined her greatly.	
touch (faculty)	rining	The blind man had to rely on his hearing and his rining.	From ME rinung.
touch (as in act of touching)	rining	A rining of the button is all that needs to be done.	
touch (as in how something feels upon being touched)	rining	This cloth has a very smooth rining.	
touch (as in way of doing something)	rining	I'm afraid that you've been losing your rining.	Meaning extended here.
touch (as in small amount)	rining	Just give it a rining of sugar.	Meaning extended here.
touch (as in trace)	rining	There was a rining of sarcasm in her voice.	Meaning extended here.
tower	tor	They thought to build a tor that reached up to the heavens.	From OE torr, a borrowing from Latin.
Tower is a late OE borrowing of the French form.
traitor	forreader	He is nothing but a filthy forreader!	See tray.
traitorous	forreaderly	He shall be punished for his forreaderly misdeeds.	
travail	swink	After months of swink, he managed to succeed.	Now an obsolete word.
Past tense: swank, past participle: swunk.
travel	wayfare	I have wayfared to many different lands.	One can also use fare by itself if the context is clear.
Traveler is a later formation and is now wayfarer or farer (especially in compounds like seafarer).
treacherous	swikeful	The king disposed of his swikeful advisor.	From ME swikeful. Extended here to mean having a false appearance of safety.
treachery	swikedom	The guard's greed led him to swikedom.	From ME swikedom.
treason	forreading	The man was condemned for his forreading.	See tray. Used also for betrayal (a native formation).
Treasonable and treasonous are later formations and are now forreaderly.
treasure	mathom	We were looking for buried mathom.	From ME madmes (< OE māþm). Extended here to be a verb with the same meaning.
treasury	mathomhouse	He was appointed secretary of the mathomhouse.	From OE māðumhūs (treasure-house).
tribe	stem	Several stems live in this region.	From the meaning of stem meaning line of ancestry and from how most other Germanic languages' word for stem is also used for tribe.
For clarity, one can use folkstem (calque of German Volksstamm).
Tribal is a later formation and is now stemly (adjective) or stemsman as a noun meaning tribesman.
uncle	eam	Everyone, my eam has come to pay us a visit.	Now a dialectal word. Originally meant maternal uncle.
urine	myeth	He was told to fill the cup with his myeth.	From OE migoþa. Pronounced /maɪθ/.
Urinate is a later Latin borrowing and is now mye (from ME mīȝen).
vacation (as in period of leisure)	holiday	We went to Italy for summer holiday.	From the British use of the word.
vacation (as in act of vacating)	withdrawing	His financial troubles led to his withdrawing from the position.	Vacate is a later borrowing from Latin and is now withdraw from (in the sense of leave, give up) or override (in the legal meaning of cancel, annul).
vain (as in pointless)	idle	I grow tired of your idle chatter.	Also replaces vain in in vain, i.e., in idle, which is attested.
vain (as in conceited)	lenchful	The lenchful man never thought that he would lose.	From OE wlencu + -ful.
vainglory	idlewolder	Her idlewolder ended up being her downfall.	From OE īdele wuldor.
Vainglorious is a later formation and is now idlewolderful.
vale, valley	dale	He painted a picture of a dale.	
value (as in monetary or relative worth)	worth	This gemstone is of great worth.	Valuable is a later formation and is now worthful.
value (as in moral value)	worth	His actions do not reflect the worths of our organization.	Meaning extended here based on the use of German Wert.
value (as in numerical value)	worth	What worth does this variable have?	Meaning extended here based on the use of German Wert.
value (verb)	worth	How much do you worth this necklace?	Based on OE gewyrþan.
vanish	swind	The magician suddenly made himself swind.	Rhymes with find. Past tense and past participle: swound (rhymes with found).
vanity (as in pointlessness)	idleness	He realized the idleness of his life.	
vanity (as in conceit)	lench	The compliments only served to feed his lench.	From OE wlencu. Extended here to phrases related to appearance such as vanity table and vanity press.
veal	calfflesh	He cooked some calfflesh for dinner.	Or: calfmeat.
Can be shortened to: calf.
vein	edder	I could feel the blood rushing through my edders.	From ME edre. Meaning extended here to other meanings of vein such as its geological meaning.
vengeance	wreaking	I was driven by strong feelings of wreaking.	See avenge.
venison	hartflesh	I ate some hartflesh for dinner.	With replacement of deer with hart (see animal).
Or: hartmeat.
Can be shortened to: hart.
venom	yelster	Beware of snakes and their yelster.	From OE geolstor meaning corruption. Meaning extended here.
venomous	yelstery	He was nearly bitten by a yelstery snake.	From OE geolstrig.
verb	workword	Be and do are both workwords.	Calque of Dutch werkwoord.
One can also use tideword, a calque of German Zeitwort, or deedword, roughly based on German Tunwort.
verbal (as in pertaining to words)	wordly	I was tested on my wordly abilities.	
verbal (as in spoken, oral)	spoken	The two formed a spoken agreement.	
verbal (as in verbatim)	word-for-word	This is a word-for-word translation of the passage.	
verbal (as in talkative)	speechful	He is a very speechful man.	
verbal (as in pertaining to verbs)	workwordly	This writer uses many different workwordly auxiliaries.	
verdant	green	The green fields lie beyond the forest.	
verdict	doom	The judge gave him a guilty doom.	See judgment.
verify	asoothe	Could you asoothe this man's statements?	Based on ME isothien, with change of prefix.
Verification is a later French or Latin borrowing and is now asoothing.
verity	truth	What I have said is simply an eternal truth.	
verse	ferse	Shakespeare's ferse is not hard to read.	From ME fers (< OE fers, a borrowing from Latin versus).
versify	ferse	I wish to ferse my thoughts.	From OE fersian.
very (intensifier)	highly	Be careful, for the dish is highly hot.	One can also use other intensifiers such as well and full (like in full well).
very (used with superlatives)	aller-	I want to be the allerbest like no one ever was.	From ME aller- (also appears in the variants alder- and alther-).
One can also use utterly, e.g., the very best thing > the utterly best thing.
very (as in absolutely)	utterly	That is the utterly same man that I'm talking about!	Also used with the adjective own, e.g., my very own house > my utterly own house.
very (as in absolute)	utter	This is what I've been saying from the utter beginning.	Also used for trivial effect, e.g., the very thought > the utter thought.
Extended here to mean exact, precise, e.g., the very heart of the matter > the utter heart of the matter.
very (as in same, identical)	ilk	I asked that ilk question the other day.	Now an archaic word.
Or: same (a Norse borrowing).
very (as in true, genuine)	true	He wondered whether he had seen the true god of peace just now.	Verily is a later formation and is now truly.
vessel (as in ship)	ship	The navy's ships have begun their voyage.	
vessel (as in container)	fat	He stored the liquid in a fat.	Now a dialectal form of vat (originally a southern form). Fat is used here since initial /v/ in standard English is mainly due to French influence.
Meaning extended here to the anatomical use of vessel.
vice	lawter	Gambling is one of his lawters.	From ME laughter (spelled as lawter on this page to prevent confusion with laughter related to laugh).
Sin can be used, but has more of a religious connotation.
vicious (as in full of vice)	lawterful	The man indulged himself in lawterful pleasures.	
vicious (as in inclined to be violent)	mean	Be careful, as that dog over there is quite mean.	
vicious (as in brutal)	scathing	He made a scathing attack on my character.	Or: shathing (from OE sceaþan/sceaþian), as scathe is from Norse.
victor	syer	To the syer go the spoils.	From ME sy + -er.
victorious	syefast	He has had syefast battle these last few months.	From ME siʒʒefasst (< OE sigefæst).
victory	sye	He achieved sye after a long battle.	From ME sy.
vile	foul	Do not listen to that foul man.	Vilify is a later Latin borrowing and is now evilqueath (from OE yfelcweþan).
village	thorp	The news had still not reached the thorp.	Or: throp (from ME throp, as thorp shows Norse influence)
Villager is a later formation and is now thorpsman (or thropsman). The feminine is thorpswoman (or thropswoman).
villain (as in scoundrel)	shather	That shather stole my belongings!	From ME shathe (meaning evil person, criminal) + -er.
Extended here to its use in fiction.
villain, villein (as in feudal tenant)	lordchurl	Three lordchurls were working on the land.	Newly formed compound based on lord and churl (meaning peasant) based on the fact that villeins were legally bound to a feudal lord.
villainage, villeinage	lordchurlhood	Lordchurlhood was practiced in the kingdom.	
villainous	shatherly	He spoke with a shatherly voice.	
villainy	shatherhood	He told me many tales of that man's shatherhood.	
vine (as in grapevine)	winetree	His garden was full of winetrees.	Now a dialectal word.
Vineyard is a later formation and is now wineyard (from OE wīnġeard).
vine (as in climbing plant)	climber	We climbed up the great tree's climbers.	
vinegar	etched	Etched is used in many recipes.	From ME eced. Pronounced with two syllables.
vintage (as in harvest)	wineharvest	This year's weather led to a good wineharvest.	Calque of Dutch wijnoogst.
vintage (as in wine identified by year)	yeargang	The wine of that yeargang is excellent.	Calque of German Jahrgang.
Also used here as an attributive word, e.g., yeargang wine (for vintage wine).
vintage (as in class of objects made in a particular period)	yeargang	Cars of that yeargang are pretty sleek.	Also used attributively here, e.g., vintage book > yeargang book. This attributive use of vintage is from its use for wine.
vintner (as in wine merchant)	winemonger	I bought this bottle from the winemonger.	Obsolete form of vintner: vinter.
vintner (as in wine grower)	winegrower	This country is the home of several esteemed winegrowers.	
violence	heast	Heast soon flooded the streets.	From ME heste.
violent	heasty	The drunken man quickly became heasty.	
virgin	femmen	This is a painting of the femmen Mary.	From OE fǣmne.
In older uses, maiden can also be used to refer to virgins.
virginity	femmenhood	The lady had never lost her femmenhood.	From OE fǣmnhād.
virtue	douth	Being aware of one's weaknesses is a douth.	From ME douth. Meaning of virtue taken from OE.
virtuous	douthful	The lord was a douthful man.	
viscount	underearl	The underearl is known for his charity.	Based on under- used for vice-, as viscount is essentially vice-count.
The feminine, viscountess, is probably a later formation and is now underearlen (see -ess).
The derivative viscountcy/viscounty is a later formation and is now underearldom.
vision (as in power of seeing)	sight	My sight has been getting worse these last few years.	Eyesight can also be used.
vision (as in mental image)	forestelling	He had a forestelling of a world without needless violence.	See imagination.
vision (as in ability to envision)	forestelling	He was rash and lacking in forestelling.	Envision is a later formation and is now forestell (see imagine).
vision (as in mental experience)	sight	This was revealed to me in a sight.	From an old use of sight.
vision (as in beautiful sight)	sight	She was simply a sight of loveliness.	
voice	steven	She spoke with a rather loud steven.	Now a dialectal word. Rhymes with seven.
Also used for grammatical voice (a use attested in OE).
Extended here to be a verb with the same meaning as voice.
voyage	wayfare	His journal describes his wayfare to Asia.	One can also use fare by itself if the context is clear.
wait (as in stay, remain)	bide	I will bide for you here.	Old verb now found in the phrase bide one's time.
wait (as in serve)	thain	One of my duties is thaining tables.	See serve.
Waiter is a later formation and is now thainer.
Waitress is a later formation and is now thaineren (see -ess).
war	wye	The two countries went to wye.	From ME wi. Meaning of war taken from OE.
Also used as a verb (< OE wīgan), with meaning narrowed to engage in a war.
warden	headward	She works as the headward of the prison.	From head + ward (see guard).
Keeper can also be used (see guardian).
In compounds such as churchwarden, warden can be replaced with ward.
warder	quarternward	The quarternwards kept a close eye on the prisoners.	From OE cwearternweard (see prison and guard).
For older uses meaning guard, one can use ward.
warrant (legal)	leavewrit	He issued a leavewrit for his arrest.	Newly formed compound based on leave meaning permission and writ referring to a legal document.
warrant (as in justification)	ground	There is no ground for that conclusion.	
warrant (as in allow)	give leave	The officer was given leave to enter the house.	Or: yeave, as give is from Norse. Past tense of yeave: yave, past participle: yeaven.
warrant (as in justify)	ground	The evidence grounds further investigation.	From an old use of ground.
warrant (as in affirm)	plight	He'll come any minute now, I plight.	From an old use of plight (see pledge).
Extended here to also mean give a warranty for.
warranty	plightwrit	The product comes with a three-year plightwrit.	Newly formed compound based on plight meaning pledge and writ referring to a legal document.
warrior	wyer	Many wyers fell in battle.	From ME wie (meaning warrior) + -er.
wizard	witchman	This is a school for aspiring witches and witchmen.	A rare but attested word.
The derivative wizardry is a later formation and is now witchcraft.
zeal	ellen	The preacher spoke with such ellen in his voice.	From ME ellen. Meaning of zeal taken from OE.
Zealous is a later Latin borrowing and is now ellenful.
zero	naught	Any number multiplied with naught gives you naught.	Alternatively spelled nought.
The word zero is also sometimes traced to Italian or Spanish. Nonetheless, no other Germanic languages have borrowed that word for the concept of zero. Rather, it appears that they use a form of null (a Latin borrowing). This use of null is attested in English.
Zeroth is a later formation and is now naughth (or noughth) or nullth (if one is willing to use null).
